A Voice from the Factories

[St. 34 – 48]

XXXIV.

Fondly familiar is the look she gives
 As he returns who forth so lately went,
 For they together pass their happy lives! 
And many a tranquil evening have they spent
 Since, blushing, ignorantly innocent,
 She vowed, with downcast eyes and changeful hue,
 To love him only. Love fulfilled hath lent
 Its deep repose; and when he meets her view
 Her soft look only says, ‘I trust – and I am true!’ 

XXXV.

Scattered like flowers the rosy children play,
 Or round her chair a busy crowd they press,
 But at the father’s coming, start away
 With playful struggle for his loved caress,
 And jealous of the one he first may bless. 
To each a welcoming word is fondly said:
 He bends and kisses some; lifts up the less;
 Admires the little cheek, so round and red,
 Or smoothes with tender hand the curled and shining head. 

XXXVI.

Oh, let us pause, and gaze upon them now! 
Is there not one beloved and lovely boy
 With Mirth’s bright seal upon his open brow,
 And sweet fond eyes, brimful of love and joy –
 He, whom no measure of delight can cloy,
 The daring and the darling of the set –
 He who, though pleased with every passing toy
 (Thoughtless and buoyant to excess), could yet
 Never a gentle word or kindly deed forget. 

XXXVII.

And one, more fragile than the rest, for whom,
 As for the weak bird in a crowded nest,
 Are needed all the fostering care of home
 And the soft comfort of the brooding breast –
 One who hath oft the couch of sickness prest
 On whom the mother looks, as it goes by,
 With tenderness intense, and fear supprest,
 While the soft patience of her active eye
 Blends with ‘God’s will be done’, ‘God grant thou mayst not die!’ 

XXXVIII.

And is there not the elder of the band,
 She with the gentle smile and smooth bright hair,
 Waiting, some paces back, content to stand
 Till these of love’s caresses have their share;
 Knowing how soon his fond parental care
 Shall seek his violet in her shady nook? 
Patient she stands, demure, and brightly fair,
 Copying the meekness of her mother’s look,
 And clasping in her hand the favourite storybook. 

XXXIX.

Wake, dreamer – choose! To labour life away,
 Which of these precious little ones shall go
 Debarred of summer-light and cheerful play)
 To that receptacle for dreary woe,
 The Factory Mill? Shall he, in whom the glow
 Of life shines bright, whose free limbs’ vigorous tread
 Warns us how much of beauty that we know
 Would fade when he became dispirited
 And pined with sickened heart, and bowed his fainting head? 

XL.

Or shall the quiet little one, whose voice
 So rarely mingles in their sounds of glee,
 Whose life can bid no living thing rejoice,
 But rather is a long anxiety –
 Shall he go forth to toil? – and keep the free
 Frank boy, whose merry shouts and restless grace
 Would leave all eyes that used his face to see
 Wistfully gazing towards that vacant space
 Which makes their fireside seem a lone and dreary place. 

XLI.

Or, sparing these, send her whose simplest words
 Have power to charm, whose warbled, childish song,
 Fluent and clear and bird-like, strikes the chords
 Of sympathy among the listening throng –
 Whose spirits light, and steps that dance along,
 Instinctive modesty and grace restrain –
 The fair young innocent who knows no wrong,
 Whose slender wrists scarce hold the silken skein
 Which the glad mother winds – shall she endure this pain? 

XLII.

Away! The thought – the thought alone – brings tears! 
They labour, they, the darlings of our lives,
 The flowers and sunbeams of our fleeting years,
 From whom alone our happiness derives
 A lasting strength, which every shock survives –
 The green young trees beneath whose arching boughs
 (When failing energy no longer strives)
 Our wearied age shall find a cool repose –
 They toil in torture? No. The painful picture close! 

XLIII.

Ye shudder – nor behold the vision more! 
Oh, fathers! is there then one law for these,
 And one for the pale children of the poor –
 That to their agony your hearts can freeze,
 Deny their pain, their toil, their slow disease,
 And deem with false complaining they encroach
 Upon your time and thought? Is yours the ease
 Which misery vainly struggles to approach,
 Whirling unthinking by in Luxury’s gilded coach? 

XLIV.

Examine and decide. Watch through his day
 One of these little ones! The sun hath shone
 An hour, and by the ruddy morning’s ray
 (The last and least) he saunters on alone. 
See where, still pausing on the threshold-stone
 He stands, as loath to lose the bracing wind –
 With wistful wandering glances backward thrown
 On all the light and glory left behind,
 And sighs to think that he must darkly be confined. 

XLV.

Enter with him. The stranger who surveys
 The little natives of that dreary place
 (Where squalid suffering meets his shrinking gaze),
 Used to the glory of a young child’s face,
 Its changeful light, its coloured sparkling grace
 (Gleams of Heaven’s sunshine on our shadowed Earth),
 Starts at each visage, wan, and bold, and base,
 Whose smiles have neither innocence nor mirth –
 And comprehends the sin, original from birth. 

XLVI.

There the pale orphan, whose unequal strength
 Loathes the incessant toil it must pursue,
 Pines for the cool sweet evening’s twilight length,
 The sunny play-hour and the morning’s dew –
 Worn with its cheerless life’s monotonous hue,
 Bowed down and faint and stupefied it stands,
 Each half-seen object reeling in its view,
 While its hot, trembling, languid little hands
 Mechanically heed the Taskmaster’s commands. 

XLVII.

There, sounds of wailing grief and painful blows
 Offend the ear, and startle it from rest
 (While the lungs gasp what air the place bestows),
 Or misery’s joyless vice, the ribald jest,
 Breaks the sick silence. Staring at the guest
 Who comes to view their labour, they beguile
 The unwatched moment: whispers half-supprest,
 And mutterings low, their faded lips defile –
 While gleams from face to face a strange and sullen smile. 

XLVIII.

These then are his companions! He, too young
 To share their base and saddening merriment,
 Sits by, his little head in silence hung,
 His limbs cramped up, his body weakly bent,
 Toiling obedient till long hours so spent
 Produce exhaustion’s slumber, dull and deep. 
The Watcher’s stroke – bold – sudden – violent! 
Urges him from that lethargy of sleep,
 And bids him wake to life – to labour, and to weep! 
