Romanticism

[Ll. 31-72, 121-138, 151-162, 211-216]

Therefore, Madame, calm yourself
 put a smile on your sweet mouth,
 because the Romantics are not after all hyenas
 they are not wolves off to eat children
 they are the flower of paladins, full of courtesy,
 especially with beautiful women like you. 

It is precisely from the language spoken
 by the paladins at the time of Charlemagne
 my dear Madam Bibin, that the Germans believed
 they could coin a similar name
 to baptise these new paladins,
 protectors of good sense and beautiful women. 

Now as far as the name is concerned, do not seek
 any more or less that what I have told you,
 if it is ugly or beautiful, what does it matter?
 the Germans were happy to call it thus
 and we will use the same to spite those
 search-the-dirt-with-a-stick people. 

To return to us, you must know
 that the big snag in poetry
 consists of the art of pleasing
 and this art lies in the magic
 of moving, of mixing, as one desires
 all the passions which we have hidden in our hearts. 

And because passions vary
 with the passing of time, they change infinitely
 according to the times, the places, the circumstances
 just like your fashions for hats,
 thus poets have to follow these trends,
 as you do with headwear. 

And similarly with your daughters
 to induce a passion for study
 you certainly do not offer them a crinoline
 or a bonnet with the brims of one hundred years ago
 nor a dress coat with a flowery pattern and with those landscapes
 which one sees on fans and Chinese wall hangings. 

It is the same with us poets
 who wishing to stimulate passions, to move hearts
 must touch the notes which entertain us
 take us, as one says to where it hurts,
 without going into the attics to pull out
 the crinolines and bonnets of the Greeks and Romans. 

Up to this, therefore, do you see that the Romantics
 are not those heretics, those sectarians
 that dangerous people that the Torquemada inquisitor
 from the opposition party would have you believe
 people who kick and straighten your ears
 when faced with that which is not understood. 

Neither should you believe those eccentricities
 which they present with the intentions of frightening you:
 that the Romantics only speak of witches,
 ghosts, sabbats, of the dead who dance,
 tut tut: they believe in these things as much as
 you believe in the Queen of Spades. 

The Romantics rather make a profession
 of keeping, with your permission, in its place
 all that picks a fight with reason
 that germinates and hatches prejudices
 from ancient Saturn to that elf
 who last year terrified all the old women. 

Lucky you, Madame, who has been brought up
 with the precepts of the Classicists
 and who in those three hours [in theatre], are enchanted
 without ever losing sight of the two unities
 knowing well the point to which your illusions can go
 before returning home. 

On the other hand, those clumsy Germans and foolish English
 are led by their poets
 and with them can spend days and months
 without realising that they have passed the limit
 and they laugh and cry like many children
 even though Horace and Aristotle would disapprove. 

But away now, go, – it is time
 To go and hear Virginia – another day
 If you do me the honour, I want to read Macbeth to you
 And I am sure and certain that at the end you will say to me
 Thank you poet, I understand, nothing else is needed
 Bragging will entangle me no longer. 
