The Visit

[Ll. 45 – 126]

Here’, said my guide,
 ‘The poor crazed inmates of yon mansion stray;
 Their keepers watch their moody wanderings,
 Yet oft in these wild heights unseen they lurk
 Eluding all research.’ I trembled at the tale –
 Oh frightful haunts! – lest a strange form,
 With sudden rage and demon strength possessed,
 Swift from yon jutting crag with fell intent
 And horrid yell might rush, and hurl me down
 The immense below. Urged by these terrors, soon
 We gained the sullen dwelling – drear retreat! 
The massy doors, the iron-grated lights,
 Appalled with very strength – I trembled there
 E’en in the terrible security. 

Then fearful wrecks of storms I ill endured
 Unmeet to greet a sympathizing guest:
 The shriek, the long loud laugh, the desperate din
 I scarce forbore to join. I clasped my dewy brows
 Insensate of the pressure, chilling cold. 
I thought, ‘Or death, or madness, soon will seize
 My trembling frame, and I shall never more
 Behold aught fair, or good, or blest, or dear.’ 
Instant I clasped them all! Oh, what a change
 To love, and hope, and joy, one tender look –
 One precious word of recognition – gave! 

Now, all her own sweet self in loveliness
 (Restored by kindest care, and medicinal aid),
 I saw my gentle friend – mutual surprise
 Of unexpected bliss! Enquiry o’er,
 And calmed the sudden joy, ‘’Tis years’, she said,
 Dark years, since we have met – dark years of grief –
 And dark the future too – but these will pass,
 These too will pass, and so we’ll meet in Heaven. 
Nay, here we’ll meet if, kind, my soon return
 Thou’lt wait amongst our native bowers – shelters
 From many a storm, when, rambling far, we saw
 The gathering clouds with fear – fond maids! – nor shunned
 The darker storms that early whelmed us o’er. 
One more request, and we will say farewell
 Lest night o’ertake thee. 
Dost thou remember,
 Six years ago (past a few warmer suns
 To give the summer ripeness) one evening
 We lingered in the copse, plucking wild flowers
 To weave us wreathes beseeming more, we said,
 The brows of simple maids, than garden flowers
 Flaunting so proud in artificial hues. 
Capricious idlers! so we moralized,
 ‘And this, for one afar!’ you cried, bending
 A pliant branch, on whose high top you hung
 A varied garland. Withdrawn the gentle force,
 Upsprung in air it waved its modest tints
 So prettily, we, smiling, marked the while
 ’Till, roused by distant sounds threatening and rude,
 We turned, and, through the mazy thicket
 (Every repelling branch or bent, or torn),
 Heedless of hurt, a tattered creature, wild,
 Haggard and wan, pressed on to where we stood
 Silent and still with fear – nor time for flight! 

In wrathful mood mad Kattern hailed us loud,
 Then you, with feigned composure, forward stepped:
 This to Kate – sweet flowers for her! Does any
 Harm poor Kate – aught ail her?” Relenting, pleased,
 She took the fragrant gift, muttered and passed. 
Poor Kate, rude boys had worried her to rage –
 Harmless else, and sometimes happy too, for
 Kate had long forgotten him who wronged her. 
Blest forgetfulness! Oh falsest man,
 Forgetting thee!’ 
Then in those softest eyes
 Gleamed wandering fires – fires not their own – but soon
 To tears they changed. ‘How much’, she said, ‘in fond
 And idle talk I, wandering, lose myself,
 Detaining thee. Tomorrow at this hour
 Cross that low copse, and climb the ascent beyond,
 So gay with yellow broom and purple heath;
 I to yon sullen heights will bend my way,
 And, if the day is fair, I have a glass
 Will show thee there – thy white kerchief waving. 
Though indistinct thy form I see, this sign
 Will mark it thine – sweet consciousness! Again
 Each day, return – the dearest hour I’ll know
 Till that I meet thee there! Farewell, farewell!’ 
‘Each word of thine is treasured – oh, farewell!’ 
