Isabella, or The Pot of Basil

[St. 32 – 63]

XXXII.

In the mid-days of autumn, on their eves,
 The breath of Winter comes from far away,
 And the sick west continually bereaves
 Of some bold tinge, and plays a roundelay
 Of death among the bushes and the leaves,
 To make all bare before he dares to stray
 From his north cavern. So sweet Isabel
 By gradual decay from beauty fell,

XXXIII.

Because Lorenzo came not. Oftentimes
 She asked her brothers, with an eye all pale,
 Striving to be itself, what dungeon-climes
 Could keep him off so long? They spake a tale
 Time after time, to quiet her. Their crimes
 Came on them, like a smoke from Hinnom’s vale;
 And every night in dreams they groaned aloud,
 To see their sister in her snowy shroud. 

XXXIV.

And she had died in drowsy ignorance,
 But for a thing more deadly dark than all –
 It came like a fierce potion, drunk by chance,
 Which saves a sick man from the feathered pall
 For some few gasping moments – like a lance,
 Waking an Indian from his cloudy hall
 With cruel pierce, and bringing him again
 Sense of the gnawing fire at heart and brain. 

XXXV.

It was a vision: in the drowsy gloom,
 The dull of midnight, at her couch’s foot
 Lorenzo stood, and wept. The forest tomb
 Had marred his glossy hair which once could shoot
 Lustre into the sun, and put cold doom
 Upon his lips, and taken the soft lute
 From his lorn voice, and past his loam
                ed
               ears
 Had made a miry channel for his tears. 

XXXVI.

Strange sound it was when the pale shadow spake,
 For there was striving in its piteous tongue
 To speak as when on earth it was awake –
 And Isabella on its music hung. 
Languor there was in it, and tremulous shake,
 As in a palsied Druid’s harp unstrung;
 And through it moaned a ghostly under-song,
 Like hoarse night-gusts sepulchral briars among. 

XXXVII.

Its eyes, though wild, were still all dewy bright
 With love, and kept all phantom fear aloof
 From the poor girl by magic of their light,
 The while it did unthread the horrid woof
 Of the late darkened time – the murderous spite
 Of pride and avarice – the dark pine roof
 In the forest – and the sodden turféd-dell,
 Where, without any word, from stabs he fell –

XXXVIII.

Saying moreover, ‘Isabel, my sweet! 
Red whortle-berries droop above my head,
 And a large flint-stone weighs upon my feet;
 Around me beeches and high chestnuts shed
 Their leaves and prickly nuts; a sheepfold-bleat
 Comes from beyond the river to my bed –
 Go, shed one tear upon my heather-bloom,
 And it shall comfort me within the tomb. 

XXXIX.

I am a shadow now, alas! alas! 
Upon the skirts of human-nature dwelling
 Alone. I chant alone the holy mass,
 While little sounds of life are round me knelling,
 And glossy bees at noon do fieldward pass,
 And many a chapel-bell the hour is telling,
 Paining me through! Those sounds grow strange to me,
 And thou art distant in humanity. 

XL.

I know what was, I feel full well what is –
 And I should rage, if spirits could go mad! 
Though I forget the taste of earthly bliss,
 That paleness warms my grave, as though I had
 A seraph chosen from the bright abyss
 To be my spouse. Thy paleness makes me glad;
 Thy beauty grows upon me, and I feel
 A greater love through all my essence steal.’ 

XLI.

The spirit mourned ‘Adieu’, dissolved, and left
 The atom-darkness in a slow turmoil –
 As when, of healthful midnight-sleep bereft,
 Thinking on rugg
                ed
               hours and fruitless toil,
 We put our eyes into a pillowy cleft,
 And see the spangly gloom froth up and boil! 
It made sad Isabella’s eyelids ache,
 And in the dawn she started up awake –

XLII.

‘Ha! ha!’ said she, ‘I knew not this hard life,
 I thought the worst was simple misery;
 I thought some fate with pleasure or with strife
 Portioned us – happy days, or else to die. 
But there is crime: a brother’s bloody knife! 
Sweet spirit, thou hast schooled my infancy:
 I’ll visit thee for this, and kiss thine eyes,
 And greet thee morn and even in the skies.’ 

XLIII.

When the full morning came, she had devised
 How she might secret to the forest hie;
 How she might find the clay, so dearly prized,
 And sing to it one latest lullaby;
 How her short absence might be unsurmised,
 While she the inmost of the dream would try. 
Resolved, she took with her an ag
                ed
               nurse,
 And went into that dismal forest-hearse. 

XLIV.

See, as they creep along the river-side,
 How she doth whisper to that ag
                ed
               dame,
 And, after looking round the champaign wide,
 Shows her a knife. ‘What feverous hectic flame
 Burns in thee, child? What good can thee betide,
 That thou shouldst smile again?’ The evening came,
 And they had found Lorenzo’s earthy bed:
 The flint was there, the berries at his head. 

XLV.

Who hath not loitered in a green churchyard,
 And let his spirit, like a demon-mole,
 Work through the clayey soil and gravel hard,
 To see skull, coffined bones, and funeral-stole;
 Pitying each form that hungry Death hath marred,
 And filling it once more with human soul? 
Ah, this is holiday to what was felt
 When Isabella by Lorenzo knelt! 

XLVI.

She gazed into the fresh-thrown mould, as though
 One glance did fully all its secrets tell. 
Clearly she saw, as other eyes would know
 Pale limbs at bottom of a crystal well. 
Upon the murderous spot she seemed to grow,
 Like to a native lily of the dell –
 Then with her knife, all sudden, she began
 To dig more fervently than misers can. 

XLVII.

Soon she turned up a soil
                ed
               glove, whereon
 Her silk had played in purple fantasies –
 She kissed it with a lip more chill than stone,
 And put it in her bosom, where it dries
 And freezes utterly unto the bone
 Those dainties made to still an infant’s cries! 
Then ’gan she work again – nor stayed her care,
 But to throw back at times her veiling hair. 

XLVIII.

That old nurse stood beside her wondering,
 Until her heart felt pity to the core
 At sight of such a dismal labouring,
 And so she kneeléd, with her locks all hoar,
 And put her lean hands to the horrid thing. 
Three hours they laboured at this travail sore;
 At last they felt the kernel of the grave,
 And Isabella did not stamp and rave. 

XLIX.

Ah, wherefore all this wormy circumstance? 
Why linger at the yawning tomb so long? 
Oh for the gentleness of old romance,
 The simple plaining of a minstrel’s song! 
Fair reader, at the old tale take a glance,
 For here, in truth, it doth not well belong
 To speak – oh turn thee to the very tale,
 And taste the music of that vision pale. 

L.

With duller steel than the Perséan sword
 They cut away no formless monster’s head,
 But one whose gentleness did well accord
 With death, as life. The ancient harps have said
 Love never dies, but lives, immortal Lord. 
If Love impersonate was ever dead,
 Pale Isabella kissed it, and low moaned. 
’Twas Love, cold – dead indeed – but not dethroned. 

LI.

In anxious secrecy they took it home,
 And then the prize was all for Isabel! 
She calmed its wild hair with a golden comb,
 And all around each eye’s sepulchral cell
 Pointed each fring
                ed
               lash. The smear
                ed
               loam
 With tears as chilly as a dripping well
 She drenched away – and still she combed, and kept
 Sighing all day – and still she kissed, and wept. 

LII.

Then in a silken scarf – sweet with the dews
 Of precious flowers plucked in Araby,
 And divine liquids come with odorous ooze
 Through the cold serpent-pipe refreshfully –
 She wrapped it up, and for its tomb did choose
 A garden-pot, wherein she laid it by
 And covered it with mould, and o’er it set
 Sweet basil, which her tears kept ever wet. 

LIII.

And she forgot the stars, the moon, and sun,
 And she forgot the blue above the trees,
 And she forgot the dells where waters run,
 And she forgot the chilly autumn breeze –
 She had no knowledge when the day was done,
 And the new morn she saw not, but in peace
 Hung over her sweet basil evermore,
 And moistened it with tears unto the core. 

LIV.

And so she ever fed it with thin tears,
 Whence thick, and green, and beautiful it grew,
 So that it smelt more balmy than its peers
 Of basil-tufts in Florence; for it drew
 Nurture besides, and life, from human fears –
 From the fast-mouldering head there shut from view –
 So that the jewel, safely casketed,
 Came forth, and in perfum
                ed
               leafits spread. 

LV.

Oh Melancholy, linger here awhile! 
Oh Music, Music, breathe despondingly! 
Oh Echo, Echo, from some sombre isle
 Unknown, Lethean, sigh to us, oh sigh! 
Spirits in grief, lift up your heads, and smile –
 Lift up your heads, sweet spirits, heavily,
 And make a pale light in your cypress-glooms,
 Tinting with silver wan your marble tombs. 

LVI.

Moan hither, all ye syllables of woe,
 From the deep throat of sad Melpomene! 
Through bronz
                ed
               lyre in tragic order go,
 And touch the strings into a mystery! 
Sound mournfully upon the winds and low,
 For simple Isabel is soon to be
 Among the dead. She withers, like a palm
 Cut by an Indian for its juicy balm. 

LVII.

Oh leave the palm to wither by itself,
 Let not quick winter chill its dying hour! 
It may not be – those Baälites of pelf,
 Her brethren, noted the continual shower
 From her dead eyes; and many a curious elf,
 Among her kindred, wondered that such dower
 Of youth and beauty should be thrown aside
 By one marked out to be a noble’s bride. 

LVIII.

And, furthermore, her brethren wondered much
 Why she sat drooping by the basil green,
 And why it flourished, as by magic touch –
 Greatly they wondered what the thing might mean. 
They could not surely give belief that such
 A very nothing would have power to wean
 Her from her own fair youth and pleasures gay –
 And even remembrance of her love’s delay. 

LIX.

Therefore they watched a time when they might sift
 This hidden whim – and long they watched in vain,
 For seldom did she go to chapel-shrift,
 And seldom felt she any hunger-pain;
 And when she left, she hurried back, as swift
 As bird on wing to breast its eggs again,
 And, patient as a hen-bird, sat her there
 Beside her basil, weeping through her hair. 

LX.

Yet they contrived to steal the basil-pot,
 And to examine it in secret place. 
The thing was vile with green and livid spot,
 And yet they knew it was Lorenzo’s face –
 The guerdon of their murder they had got,
 And so left Florence in a moment’s space,
 Never to turn again. Away they went,
 With blood upon their heads, to banishment! 

LXI.

Oh Melancholy, turn thine eyes away! 
Oh Music, Music, breathe despondingly! 
Oh Echo, Echo, on some other day,
 From isles Lethean, sigh to us, oh sigh! 
Spirits of grief, sing not your ‘Well-a-way!’ 
For Isabel, sweet Isabel, will die –
 Will die a death too lone and incomplete,
 Now they have ta’en away her basil sweet. 

LXII.

Piteous, she looked on dead and senseless things,
 Asking for her lost basil amorously;
 And with melodious chuckle in the strings
 Of her lorn voice, she oftentimes would cry
 After the pilgrim in his wanderings
 To ask him where her basil was, and why
 ’Twas hid from her. ‘For cruel ’tis’, said she,
 ‘To steal my basil-pot away from me!’ 

LXIII.

And so she pined, and so she died forlorn,
 Imploring for her basil to the last. 
No heart was there in Florence but did mourn
 In pity of her love, so overcast;
 And a sad ditty, of this story born,
 From mouth to mouth through all the country passed. 
Still is the burden sung: ‘Oh cruelty,
 To steal my basil-pot away from me!’ 
