On Sepulchers.

To Ippolito Pindemonte

In the shade of cypresses, and inside urns
comforted by tears, is the sleep of death
perhaps less hard? When the sun no more for me
makes earth fertile with this family
of lovely plants and animals; and when,
beautiful with illusory promises,
the future hours dance for me no more;
and when, sweet friend, I hear no more from you
the mournful harmony that rules your verse;
and when in my heart the spirit speaks no more
of the virgin Muses and of love,
the only spirit of my wandering life;
what restitution can it be for lost days
that a stone be placed to tell my bones
from the countless bones death sows through land and sea?
It’s true indeed, Pindemonte! Even Hope,
last of goddesses, flies from sepulchers;
oblivion seals all things in its night;
an ever-active force exhausts them all
in endless movements; and man, and his tombs,
and the last semblances and relics
of earth and sky are travestied by time.

But why, before time, will mortal man
renounce the illusion which holds him back,
though dead, on the threshold of Hades’ kingdom?
Does he not perhaps live on even underground,
when the day’s harmony is mute to him,
if he can awaken it with gentle cares
in the minds of those he loved? Heavenly,
this corresponding tenderness of feeling,
heavenly this gift to humans; by its means
we often live with the departed friend
and the friend with us — if the reverent earth,
which welcomed him in infancy and fed him,
by granting him now in its motherly lap
a last asylum, keeps his relics sacred
from the weather’s insults and the profane feet
of the crowd, and a stone preserves his name,
and a friendly tree fragrant with flowers
solaces his ashes with soft shade.

Only he who leaves no legacy of feeling
has little joy in urns; and if he looks
beyond his burial, he sees his spirit roam
amid the general weeping of the temples
of Acheron, or steal beneath the great wings
of God’s forgiveness: but his dust he leaves
to the nettles of a patch of desert
where no loving woman prays for him
and no lonely traveler hears the sigh |
that Nature sends us from the tomb.

Yet now a new law places sepulchers
beyond the eyes of pity, and to the dead
denies their name. And tombless lies your priest,
O Thalia, the one who sang to you
in his poor dwelling, raised a laurel
with enduring love, and offered crowns to you;
while with your laughter you enriched the songs
that stung the Lombard Sardanapalus,
who only loves the lowing of the cattle
that from Abduan hollows and Ticino
make him blissful with idleness and feasting.
O lovely Muse, where are you? I do not scent
the breath of ambrosia, sign of your godhead,
here where I sit among these plants and sigh
for my mother’s house. And you would descend
and smile on him beneath that linden tree
that now with boughs bent low is shivering
because it cannot shield the urn of the old man
to whom it once was generous with calm and shade.
Perhaps, now wandering among humble graves,
you seek the place where sleeps the sacred head
of your Parini? No shade within its walls
would it grant him, that lascivious city,
temptress of emasculated singers —
no stone, no word; and it may be his bones
are bloodied by the severed head of a thief
who left his crimes behind on the scaffold.
Scratching among the briars and debris you hear
the derelict bitch that wanders over
the burial pits howling with hunger;
and the hoopoe leaving the skull where it fled
from the moon and gliding among the crosses
scattered throughout the funereal field,
the unclean thing, accusing with mournful sobs
the rays with which the stars are piteous
toward forgotten tombs. In vain, O Goddess,
from the squalid night you pray for dew
upon your poet. Alas! above the dead
no flower can grow where no one honors it
with human praises and the tears of love.

From the day that marriage, law-courts, and altars
bade human animals show reverence
to themselves and others, the living carried off
from malignant air and savage beasts
the miserable remains that Nature
destines with ceaseless change for other ends.
Tombs were testimonials of great events
and altars for the sons, and thence the answers came
from the household Lares, and awful was an oath
sworn upon the ashes of the ancestors:
a religion that with varied rites passed down
paternal virtue and wedded devotion,
transmitted through a long succession of years.
Not always did sepulchral stones make floors
for temples; nor did the stench of dead bodies
mingled with incense contaminate
the worshippers; nor were cities mournful
with effigies of skeletons: mothers
start terror-stricken from their sleep, and stretch
their bare arms over the beloved head
of their dear nursling so it won’t be wakened
by the long lament of a dead person
begging his heirs for the prayers for sale
in the sanctuary. But cypress and cedar,
impregnating the air with pure perfume,
extended perennial green over the urns
for perennial remembrance, and precious
vases gathered dedicated tears.
Friends stole a spark from the sun to bring
a lamp to the subterranean night
because the eyes of a man while dying
search for the sun, and every breast sends out
its last sigh after the parting light.
The fountains pouring purifying water
raised up amaranths and violets
on the funereal turf; and those who sat there
to pour libations of milk and tell their sorrows
to the dear dead ones, breathed in a fragrance
like the air of blessed Elysium.
A pious madness that makes the gardens
of suburban graveyards dear to British
maidens where their love for a lost mother
leads them, where they prayed their ancestors
to smile upon the brave man’s return
who had the tallest mast cut from a ship
he conquered, and carved his coffin from it.
But where the furor of noble deeds sleeps
and the ministers of civil life
are wealth and fear, marble monuments
and columns rise as pompous vanity
and inauspicious images of Orcus.
Already the learned, rich, patrician mob,
ornament and mind of Italy’s fair realm,
in flattered royal palaces find their graves
while still alive, their crests their only fame.
For us let death prepare a peaceful haven
where fortune may for once find respite
from revenge, and let friendship gather
its bequest not of treasure but warm hearts
and the example of unservile song.

In a great soul the urns of the great
inspire glorious deeds, Pindemonte,
and make fair and sacred to the pilgrim
the earth that receives them. When I myself
saw the monument where the great man lies
who hardened the sceptre of the princes
while stripping their laurels, showing the people
with what tears they drip and with what blood;
and the ark of him who raised a new Olympus
in Rome to the heavens; and of him who saw
under the etherial pavilion
more worlds turning, the unmoved sun lighting them,
whence he first cleared the ways of the firmament
for the Englishman who stretched so great a wing there;
How blessed you are, I cried, for your cheerful
breezes stirring with life and for the streams
Apennine pours down to you from its peaks!
Gladdened by your air, the moon invests your hills
with light of greatest clarity, now festive
with the wine-harvest, and the little valleys
peopled with houses and with olive groves
send a thousand flowers’ incense to the sky:
And you, Florence, were the first to hear the song
that lightened the exiled Ghibelline’s wrath,
and you gave dear parents and your language
to those sweet lips of Calliope, -
which took Love, nude in Greece and nude in Rome,
and beautifying him with the whitest veil
set him on the lap of Heavenly Venus:
but more blessed that, gathered in a temple, iso
you keep Italy’s glories, unique perhaps
since the poorly defended Alps and the fickle
omnipotence of human fortune
have stolen your arms, altars, property,
fatherland, and everything but memory.
Thus when hope of glory shines on daring
intellects and on Italy, good omens
we shall draw from them. And to these marbles
Vittorio would come for inspiration.
Angry with his country’s gods, he would wander
silent where the Amo is most desolate
and look longingly at field and sky;
and when nothing living softened his cares
there the austere man would rest; on his face
he had the pallor of death and hope.
With these great he dwells eternally: his bones
tremble with love of fatherland. Oh yes!
From this religious peace a god speaks:
and against the Persians at Marathon
where Athens dedicated tombs to her brave
it roused Greek valor and wrath. The mariner
who sailed the sea below Euboea
through the deep obscurity saw the flash
of sparks from helmets and clashing swords,
pyres smoking with fiery clouds; he saw
phantom warriors glitter with iron arms
as they sought out battle; and in the horror
of nocturnal silences a tumult
of phalanxes spread far into the fields,
and trumpet sounds, and urgings of horses
trampling on the helmets of the dying,
and laments, and hymns, and the Fates’ song.

Happy are you who traveled the broad realm
of the wind, Ippolito, in your green years!
If for you the pilot set the sailyard
beyond the Aegean isles, you surely heard
the shores of the Hellespont resound
with ancient deeds, and the bellowing sea
bring Achilles’ arms to the Rhoetean sands
over Ajax’ bones; to the noble-hearted
death is a just dispenser of glory;
neither his cleverness nor the favor of kings
preserved the Ithacan’s hard-won spoils,
as the waves, incited by the lower gods,
took them back from the wandering ship.

And me, whom the times and love of honor
send fugitive among different peoples,
let the Muses, who inspire mortal thought,
summon me to invocate the heroes.
They sit as guardians of tombs, and when
time with frigid wings has shattered even
the ruins there, the Pimpleians delight
the deserts with their song, and harmony
defeats the silence of ten thousand years.
And today in the unplanted Troad
a place shines eternally to pilgrims,
eternal through a Nymph whose spouse was Jove,
and to Jove she gave a son, Dardanus,
from whom came Troy, Assaracus, the fifty
bridal beds, and the reign of the Julians.
For when Electra heard one of the Fates
summon her from the day’s living breezes
to the choirs of Elysium, to Jove
she sent her last prayer: and if, she said,
my tresses and my face were dear to you
and sweet wakeful nights, and the will of the Fates
confers on me no better prize, at least
keep watch from heaven on your dead lover
so the fame of your Electra may survive.
Praying so, she died. The Olympian wept
over it; and nodding his immortal head
rained ambrosia from his locks on the Nymph
and sanctified her body and her tomb.
There Erichthonius rested, and the just
ashes of Ilus sleep; there Trojan women
loosed their hair, alas, in vain, crying out
against the imminent doom of their men;
there Cassandra, when the god in her breast
made her speak of Troy and the fatal day,
came and sang a song of love to the shades,
and she brought their grandsons, and taught these youths
how to chant the loving lamentation.
And sighing, she said, Oh, if from Argos,
where you will feed the horses of Tydides
and the son of Laertes, heaven ever
lets you return, in vain will you search
for your homeland! The walls, Apollo’s work,
will be smoldering beneath their ruins.
But Troy’s Penates will still have lodging
in this tomb; since it is given to gods
to maintain their proud name through misfortune.
And you palms and cypresses, which the wives
of Priam’s sons have planted, and will grow
watered, how soon, alas! by widows’ tears,
protect my fathers: and he who piously
keeps his ax from these dedicated leaves
will grieve less for domestic warfare
and will touch the altar with pure hands.
Protect my fathers. One day you will see
a blind beggar wandering beneath
your most ancient shades and with groping hands
enter into the tombs, and embrace the urns,
and ask them questions. The secret caves
will moan and the tomb will tell the whole tale:
Ilium twice destroyed and twice reborn
in splendor over the silent pathways
to make more beautiful the final prize
of the fateful Pelians. The sacred bard,
appeasing these afflicted souls with song,
will immortalize the Argive princes MO
through all the lands embraced by Father Ocean.
And you will be honored with tears, Hector,
wherever blood shed for one’s land is holy
and merits weeping, as long as the sun
shines resplendent on human sorrows.
