Julian and Maddalo: A Conversation

[Ll. 1-67]

I rode one evening with Count Maddalo
 Upon the bank of land which breaks the flow
 Of Adria towards Venice – a bare strand
 Of hillocks, heaped from ever-shifting sand,
 Matted with thistles and amphibious weeds
 Such as from earth’s embrace the salt ooze breeds,
 Is this – an uninhabitable sea-side
 Which the lone fisher, when his nets are dried,
 Abandons; and no other objects breaks
 The waste, but one dwarf tree and some few stakes
 Broken and unrepaired, and the tide makes
 A narrow space of level sand thereon,
 Where ’twas our wont to ride while day went down. 
This ride was my delight. 
I love all waste
 And solitary places, where we taste
 The pleasure of believing what we see
 Is boundless, as we wish our souls to be –
 And such was this wide ocean, and this shore
 More barren than its billows – and yet more
 Than all, with a remembered friend I love
 To ride as then I rode. For the wind drove
 The living spray along the sunny air
 Into our faces; the blue heavens were bare,
 Stripped to their depths by the awakening north;
 And from the waves sound, like delight, broke forth,
 Harmonizing with solitude, and sent
 Into our hearts aërial merriment! 
So, as we rode, we talked, and the swift thought,
 Winging itself with laughter, lingered not,
 But flew from brain the brain (such glee was ours)
 Charged with light memories of remembered hours,
 None slow enough for sadness – till we came
 Homeward, which always makes the spirit tame. 
This day had been cheerful, but cold, and now
 The sun was sinking, and the wind also. 
Our talk grew somewhat serious, as may be
 Talk interrupted with such raillery
 That mocks itself because it cannot scorn
 The thoughts it would extinguish – ’twas forlorn
 But pleasing, such as once (so poets tell)
 The devils held within the dales of Hell
 Concerning God, free-will, and destiny! 
Of all that Earth has been, or yet may be,
 All that vain men imagine or believe,
 Or hope can paint, or suffering may achieve,
 We descanted, and I (for ever, still,
 Is it not wise to make the best of ill?) –
 Argued against despondency, but pride
 Made my companion take the darker side. 
The sense that he was greater than his kind
 Had struck, methinks, his eagle-spirit blind
 By gazing on its own exceeding light. 
Meanwhile the sun paused ere it should alight,
 Over the horizon of the mountains. Oh
 How beautiful is sunset, when the glow
 Of Heaven descends upon a land like thee,
 Thou paradise of exiles, Italy –
 Thy mountains, seas and vineyards, and the towers
 Of cities they encircle! It was ours
 To stand on thee beholding it; and then,
 Just where we had dismounted, the Count’s men
 Were waiting for us with the gondola. 
As those who pause on some delightful way
 Though bent on pilgrimage, we stood
 Looking upon the evening and the flood
 Which lay between the city and the shore,
 Paved with the image of the sky. 
