Marya.

A Tale of Ukraine.

[Canto I, st. I-III.]

CANTO I

I

HEY! thou Cossack, whither on thy fleet-hoofed horse are flying? 
Yonder hare that skims the steppe art spying? 
Or, heartsick of meditation, dost thou strain
 To free thyself, to race the charging winds of the Ukraine? 
Perhaps unto thy love who on some distant plain awaiteth thee,
 Murmuring thy melancholy air, thou fli’st impatiently. 
For thou hast pulled down thy cap and loosed the rein,
 And now a cloud of dust hangs thick above the plain. 
Thy tawny face is shining with some ardor half-concealed,
 And joy, like sudden light from darksome field,
 Breaks, when thy charger, wild but curbed like thee,
 Stretching his neck, bursts through the winds that lure him free. 
Yon Black Sea Cossacks with the squeaking carts, Run! Hide! 
The scions of the steppe will thrust your salt aside. 
And all you little black birds with your friendly greeting,
 Who circle overhead and look about entreating,
 Quick! Tell your secret to the Cossack, fly! 
Before you circle ’round he will rush by! 

II

ON, on they speed, amid the sun’s departing glow,
 Swift as couriers of the Gods they go,
 And still from far away persists that steady beat,
 And over all the wilderness broods silence, dark and deep. 
No voice is heard of merry squire, nor knight, upon this plain,
 Only the rushing wind that sadly stirs the ears of grain,
 Only from all the graves the sadly murmured story,
 The tale of those who sleep amid the tokens of their glory. 
Music, wild and mad ... madder still the chorus runs;
 Words the Soul of Ancient Poland cherishes for future sons. 
When here a single rose marks all their ancient glory,
 Whose heart, whose, breaks not at man’s despairing story? 

III

NOW flew the Cossack horseman over gorges dread and deep,
 Where wolves are like to hide themselves and Tartars vigil keep. 
His racing steed he guided straight past a well-known hill
 Where ancient ghosts are lurking and spectres watching still. 
His cap he doffed before it, three times his bosom crossed,
 Then, like the wind across the steppe, horse and Cossack passed. 
No phantom frightened his charger, impatient to go on,
 He only snorted, gave a kick, and like a flash was gone. 
The dark Boh draws its silver thread across the granite plain,
 And now the faithful little steed has sensed his Cossack’s game –
 The osiers hide dread foemen, the osiers by the mill,
 But the nimble little charger knows at once his master’s will,
 They fly o’er flowery meadows, through thistles sharp and keen,
 As swiftly as the mountain goat, as lightly as a dream,
 Bent low above his saddle, like arrow poised for flight,
 Close lies the nimble Cossack, against his horse pressed tight,
 So through the empty, trackless waste the steppe-king seeks his goal,
 Steppe and Cossack, horse and night, a wild, unfettered soul. 
And who would fain forbid him this hour of revelry? 
He’s gone! His native steppe-land will enfold him tenderly. 
