The End of Satan

[Beyond Earth III, Satan at Night XV-XVI]

XV

Oh! the essence of God is to love. Man believes
 That God is, like him, only a soul, and that he isolates himself
 From the universe, immense dust which takes wing;
 But I, the sad enemy and the eternal mocker,
 I know it, God is not a soul, he is a heart. 
God, loving center of the world, to his divine fibers
 Reattaches all the threads of all the roots,
 And his tenderness equates a worm with a seraph;
 And it is to the astonishment of the endless spaces
 That this frightening heart, blasphemed by preachers,
 Has as many rays as the universe has creatures. 
For him to create, think, meditate, animate,
 Sow, destroy, make, be, see, is to love. 
Splendid, he loves, and it is on the ebb that he is adored;
 Everything rolls in him; he holds to the night by the dawn,
 To minds by the idea, to flowers by the scent;
 And this heart in its abyss holds infinity, minus one. 
Minus Satan, rejected forever, damned, dismal. 
God excepts me. He ends at me. I am his boundary-stone. 
God would be infinite if I did not exist. 
I say to him: You did well, God, when you struck me! 
I do not accuse him, no; but I despair! 
O dark eternity, I am the son without a father. 
By Satan he is, but is no longer God. 

XVI

A hundred times, a hundred times, a hundred times, I repeat the confession,
 I love! And God tortures me, and here is my blasphemy,
 Here is my frenzy and my howl: I love! 
I love so much the skies tremble! – What, all is vain;
 Oh! this is the unheard-of, the horrible, the divine,
 To stand up, to open extravagant wings,
 To tie oneself, bloody, to all the thoughts
 That one can seize, with cries, with tears,
 To plumb the terrors, to plumb the pains,
 All, those one suffers and those one invents,
 To travel the whole circle of dread,
 To fall back always into the same despair;
 God wants the weary man to sleep, he makes night;
 He digs an underground room for the mole;
 He gives the monkey, the bear, the lynx, the panther,
 The bitter hospitality of lairs and hills;
 To whales the seas, to toads the silt;
 The reeds to the snakes shaking their rattles;
 He makes planets turn around suns
 And in virgins’ white hands the spindles;
 He enters the nests, touches the little birds,
 And says: The breeze comes, I will thicken their feathers;
 He lets the spark escape from the anvils,
 And permits it, joyous, to flee the hammers;
 He shows his great sky to the lions of Mount Athos;
 He spreads out in the dawn, as though they were baskets,
 Under streams of rays, the springtimes full of bees;
 His greatness for the world is resolved in kindness. 
A vast burning light sets all ablaze,
 From the archangel to the brute and from the star to the stone,
 Crosses in a forest of fire its branches of light,
 Goes, comes, climbs, descends, makes fruitful, inflames, fills,
 Fights the winter tying the rivers to their bed,
 And makes it let go, and laughs in everything,
 Shines softly behind a rose leaf,
 Warms the sidereal enormity of the skies,
 Shines, and by me, monstrous prodigy,
 This flaming rises as a wall of ice;
 Yes, happy creation is interlaced
 Completely, lights and mist, minds and bodies,
 In the God of good, with ineffable accords;
 The most fallen being regains innocence
 In his omnibenevolence and omnipotence;
 I alone, I the cursed, the incurable apostate,
 I approach God with no other result
 Than to make thunder growl vaguely! 
God wants this swarm of atoms to venerate him,
 He asks of all of them their heart, their song, their noise,
 Their perfume, their prayer; of me nothing, all night. 
O bottomless misery; listen to this, spheres,
 Stars, firmaments, O old suns, my brothers,
 Toward whom rises, crying, my painful wish,
 Skies, azures, depths, splendors, – love hates me! 
