The Discharged Soldier

I love to walk
 Along the public way when, for the night
 Deserted in its silence, it assumes
 A character of deeper quietness
 Than pathless solitudes. At such a time
 I slowly mounted up a steep ascent
 Where the road’s watery surface to the ridge
 Of that sharp rising glittered in the moon,
 And seemed before my eyes another stream
 Stealing with silent lapse to join the brook
 That murmured in the valley. On I passed
 Tranquil, receiving in my own despite
 Amusement, as I slowly passed along,
 From such near objects as from time to time
 Perforce disturbed the slumber of the sense
 Quiescent and disposed to sympathy –
 With an exhausted mind worn out by toil
 And all unworthy of the deeper joy
 Which waits on distant prospect, cliff or sea,
 The dark blue vault, and universe of stars. 

Thus did I steal along that silent road,
 My body from the stillness drinking in
 A restoration like the calm of sleep
 But sweeter far. Above, before, behind,
 Around me, all was peace and solitude:
 I looked not round, nor did the solitude
 Speak to my eye, but it was heard and felt. 
Oh happy state – what beauteous pictures now
 Rose in harmonious imagery! They rose
 As from some distant region of my soul
 And came along like dreams – yet such as left
 Obscurely mingled with their passing forms
 A consciousness of animal delight,
 A self-possession felt in every pause
 And every gentle movement of my frame. 

While thus I wandered, step by step led on,
 It chanced a sudden turning of the road
 Presented to my view an uncouth shape
 So near that, stepping back into the shade
 Of a thick hawthorn, I could mark him well,
 Myself unseen. He was of stature tall,
 A foot above man’s common measure tall,
 And lank, and upright. There was in his form
 A meagre stiffness – you might almost think
 That his bones wounded him. His legs were long,
 So long and shapeless that I looked at them
 Forgetful of the body they sustained. 
His arms were long and lean; his hands were bare;
 His visage, wasted though it seemed, was large
 In feature; his cheeks sunken; and his mouth
 Showed ghastly in the moonlight. From behind,
 A milestone propped him, and his figure seemed
 Half-sitting and half-standing. I could mark
 That he was clad in military garb,
 Though faded yet entire. His face was turned
 Towards the road, yet not as if he sought
 For any living thing. He appeared
 Forlorn and desolate, a man cut off
 From all his kind, and more than half-detached
 From his own nature. 
He was alone,
 Had no attendant, neither dog, nor staff,
 Nor knapsack – in his very dress appeared
 A desolation, a simplicity,
 That appertained to solitude: I think
 If but a glove had dangled in his hand
 It would have made him more akin to man. 
Long time I scanned him, with a mingled sense
 Of fear and sorrow. From his lips meanwhile
 There issued murmuring sounds as if of pain
 Or of uneasy thought; yet still his form
 Kept the same fearful steadiness. His shadow
 Lay at his feet and moved not. 
In a glen
 Hard by, a village stood, whose silent doors
 Were visible among the scattered trees,
 Scarce distant from the spot an arrow’s flight. 
I wished to see him move, but he remained
 Fixed to his place, and still from time to time
 Sent forth a murmuring voice of dead complaint,
 A groan scarce audible. Yet all the while
 The chained mastiff in his wooden house
 Was vexed, and from among the village trees
 Howled never ceasing. Not without reproach
 Had I prolonged my watch, and now confirmed,
 And my heart’s specious cowardice subdued,
 I left the shady nook where I had stood
 And hailed the stranger. 
From his resting-place
 He rose, and, with his lean and wasted arm
 In measured gesture lifted to his head,
 Returned my salutation. A short while
 I held discourse on things indifferent
 And casual matter. He meanwhile had ceased
 From all complaint – his station had resumed,
 Propped by the milestone as before. And when erelong
 I asked his history, he in reply
 Was neither slow nor eager, but unmoved,
 And with a quiet uncomplaining voice,
 A stately air of mild indifference,
 He told a simple fact: that he had been
 A soldier, to the Tropic Isles had gone,
 Whence he had landed now some ten days past;
 That on his landing he had been dismissed,
 And with the little strength he yet had left
 Was travelling to regain his native home. 

At this I turned, and through the trees looked down
 Into the village – all were gone to rest:
 Nor smoke nor any taper-light appeared,
 But every silent window to the moon
 Shone with a yellow glitter. ‘No one there’,
 Said I, ‘is waking; we must measure back
 The way which we have come. Behind yon wood
 A labourer dwells, an honest man and kind;
 He will not murmur should we break his rest,
 And he will give you food if food you need,
 And lodging for the night.’ At this he stooped,
 And from the ground took up an oaken staff
 By me yet unobserved, a traveller’s staff,
 Which I suppose from his slack hand had dropped,
 And (such the languor of the weary man)
 Had lain till now neglected in the grass,
 But not forgotten. 
Back we turned and shaped
 Our course toward the cottage. He appeared
 To travel without pain, and I beheld
 With ill-suppressed astonishment his tall
 And ghostly figure moving at my side. 
As we advanced I asked him for what cause
 He tarried there, nor had demanded rest
 At inn or cottage. He replied, ‘In truth
 My weakness made me loath to move, and here
 I felt myself at ease and much relieved –
 But that the village mastiff fretted me,
 And every second moment rang a peal
 Felt at my very heart. There was no noise,
 Nor any foot abroad; I do not know
 What ailed him, but it seemed as if the dog
 Were howling to the murmur of the stream.’ 

While thus we travelled on I did not fail
 To question him of what he had endured
 From war and battle and the pestilence. 
He all the while was in demeanour calm,
 Concise in answer: solemn and sublime
 He might have seemed, but that in all he said
 There was a strange half-absence and a tone
 Of weakness and indifference, as of one
 Remembering the importance of his theme,
 But feeling it no longer. We advanced
 Slowly, and ere we to the wood were come
 Discourse had ceased. Together on we passed
 In silence through the shades gloomy and dark,
 Then turning up along an open field
 We gained the cottage. 
At the door I knocked,
 And called aloud, ‘My friend, here is a man
 By sickness overcome; beneath your roof
 This night let him find rest, and give him food –
 The service if need be I will requite.’ 
Assured that now my comrade would repose
 In comfort, I entreated that henceforth
 He would not linger in the public ways
 But at the door of cottage or of inn
 Demand the succour which his state required,
 And told him, feeble as he was, ’twere fit
 He asked relief or alms. At this reproof,
 With the same ghastly mildness in his look,
 He said, ‘My trust is in the God of Heaven,
 And in the eye of him that passes me.’ 

By this the labourer had unlocked the door,
 And now my comrade touched his hat again
 With his lean hand, and, in a voice that seemed
 To speak with a reviving interest
 Till then unfelt, he thanked me. I returned
 The blessing of the poor unhappy man,
 And so we parted. 
