To William Wordsworth

Oh friend! Oh teacher! God’s great gift to me! 
Into my heart have I received that lay
 More than historic, that prophetic lay,
 Wherein (high theme by thee first sung aright)
 Of the foundations and the building-up
 Of thy own spirit thou hast loved to tell
 What may be told, to the understanding mind
 Revealable – and what within the mind
 May rise enkindled. 
Theme hard as high! 
Of smiles spontaneous and mysterious fears:
 The firstborn they of Reason, and twin-birth. 
Of tides obedient to external force,
 And currents self-determined (as might seem),
 Or by interior power. Of moments awful,
 Now in thy hidden life, and now abroad
 Mid festive crowds (thy brows too garlanded,
 A brother of the feast). Of fancies fair,
 Hyblaean murmurs of poetic thought
 Industrious in its joy, by lilied streams
 Native or outland, lakes and famous hills. 
Of more than fancy: of the hope of man
 Amid the tremor of a realm aglow,
 Where France in all her towns lay vibrating,
 Even as a bark becalmed on sultry seas
 Beneath the voice from Heaven – the bursting crash
 Of Heaven’s immediate thunder, when no cloud
 Is visible, or shadow on the main
 (Ah, soon night rolled on night, and every cloud
 Opened its eye of fire; and Hope aloft
 Now fluttered, and now tossed, upon the storm
 Floating). Of Hope afflicted and struck down –
 Thence summoned homeward, homeward to thy heart,
 Oft from the watchtower of man’s absolute self
 (With light unwaning in her eyes) to look
 Far on, herself a glory to behold,
 The Angel of the Vision! Then – last strain! –
 Of Duty (chosen laws controlling choice),
 Virtue and Love! An Orphic tale indeed,
 A tale divine of high and passionate thoughts
 To their own music chanted. 
Ah great Bard,
 Ere yet that last swell dying awed the air,
 With steadfast ken I viewed thee in the choir
 Of ever-enduring men! The truly great
 Have all one age, and from one visible space
 Shed influence, for they – both power, and act –
 Are permanent, and time is not with them,
 Save as it worketh for them, they in it. 
Nor less a sacred roll than those of old
 (And to be placed, as they, with gradual fame
 Among the archives of mankind), thy work
 Makes audible a link
                ed
               song of truth –
 Of truth profound, a sweet continuous song,
 Not learnt, but native, her own natural notes! 
Dear shall it be to every human heart –
 To me how more than dearest – me, on whom
 Comfort from thee, and utterance of thy love,
 Came with such heights and depths of harmony,
 Such sense of wings uplifting, that the storm
 Scattered and whirled me, till my thoughts
 Became a bodily tumult, and thy faithful hopes
 (Thy hopes of me, my friend, by me unfelt)
 Were troublous to me, almost as a voice
 Familiar once, and more than musical,
 To one cast forth whose hope had seemed to die –
 A wanderer with a worn-out heart,
 Mid strangers pining with untended wounds. 
Oh friend, too well thou knowst of what sad years
 The long suppression had benumbed my soul,
 That even as life returns upon the drowned
 The unusual joy awoke a throng of pains:
 Keen pangs of love (awakening, as a babe,
 Turbulent, with an outcry in the heart),
 And fears self-willed, that shunned the eye of hope,
 And hope that would not know itself from fear –
 Sense of past youth, and manhood come in vain,
 And genius given, and knowledge won in vain;
 And all which I had culled in wood-walks wild,
 And all which patient toil had reared, and all,
 Commune with thee had opened out, but flowers
 Strewed on my corse, and borne upon my bier
 In the same coffin, for the self-same grave. 
That way no more! And ill beseems it me,
 Who came a welcomer, in herald’s guise
 Singing of glory and futurity,
 To wander back on such unhealthful roads
 Plucking the poisons of self-harm! And ill
 Such intertwine beseems triumphal wreathes
 Strewed before thy advancing! Thou too, friend! 
Oh injure not the memory of that hour
 Of thy communion with my nobler mind
 By pity or grief, already felt too long! 
Nor let my words import more blame than needs:
 The tumult rose, and ceased – for peace is nigh
 Where wisdom’s voice has found a listening heart. 
Amid the howl of more that wintry storms
 The halcyon hears the voice of vernal hours
 Already on the wing! 
Eve following eve
 (Dear tranquil time, when the sweet sense of home
 Becomes most sweet) – hours for their own sake hailed,
 And more desired, more precious, for thy song! 
In silence listening, like a devout child,
 My soul lay passive: by thy various strain
 Driven as in surges now, beneath the stars
 (With momentary stars of my own birth –
 Fair constellated foam – still darting off
 Into the darkness), now a tranquil sea
 Outspread and bright, yet swelling to the moon! 
And when, oh friend, my comforter, my guide,
 Strong in thyself and powerful to give strength,
 Thy long sustain
                ed
               lay finally closed,
 And thy deep voice had ceased (yet thou thyself
 Wert still before mine eyes, and round us both
 That happy vision of beloved faces –
 All whom I deepliest love, in one room, all),
 Scarce conscious, and yet conscious of its close,
 I sat, my being blended in one thought –
 Thought was it, or aspiration, or resolve? –
 Absorbed, yet hanging still upon the sound. 
And when I rose, I found myself in prayer. 
