The Bride of Abydos

[Canto II, st. 22-27]

XXII.

Zuleika mute and motionless
 Stood, like that statue of distress
 When (her last hope forever gone)
 The mother hardened into stone –
 All in the maid that eye could see
 Was but a younger Niobe! 
But ere her lip, or even her eye,
 Essayed to speak or look reply,
 Beneath the garden’s wicket-porch
 Far flashed on high a blazing torch –
 Another – and another – and another! 
‘Oh fly – no more, yet now my more than brother!’ 
Far, wide, through every thicket spread,
 The fearful lights are gleaming red –
 Nor these alone, for each right hand
 Is ready with a sheathless brand. 
They part, pursue, return and wheel,
 With searching flambeau, shining steel;
 And last of all, his sabre waving,
 Stern Giaffir in his fury raving! 
And now almost they touch the cave –
 Oh, must that grot be Selim’s grave? 

XXIII.

Dauntless he stood – ‘’Tis come – soon past –
 One kiss, Zuleika – ’tis my last! 
But yet my band, not far from shore,
 May hear this signal, see the flash –
 Yet now too few, the attempt were rash –
 No matter – yet one effort more!’ 
Forth to the cavern-mouth he stepped –
 His pistol’s echo rang on high –
 Zuleika started not, nor wept,
 Despair benumbed her breast and eye. 
‘They hear me not! Or if they ply
 Their oars, ’tis but to see me die! 
That sound hath drawn my foes more nigh –
 Then forth my father’s scimitar –
 Thou ne’er hast seen less equal war! 
Farewell, Zuleika! Sweet, retire –
 Yet stay within – here linger, safe –
 At thee his rage will only chafe. 
Stir not, lest even to thee perchance
 Some erring blade or ball should glance. 
Fearst thou for him? May I expire
 If in this strife I seek thy sire! 
No – though by him that poison poured! 
No – though he called me coward! 
But tamely shall I meet their steel? 
No – as each crest, save his, may feel! 

XXIV.

One bound he made, and gained the sand:
 Already at his feet hath sunk
 The foremost of the prying band,
 A gasping head, a quivering trunk! 
Another falls – but round him close
 A swarming circle of his foes. 
From right to left his path he cleft,
 And almost met the meeting wave! 
His boat appears – not five oars’ length –
 His comrades strain with desperate strength! 
Oh, are they yet in time to save? 
His feet the foremost breakers lave,
 His band are plunging in the bay –
 Their sabres glitter through the spray –
 Wet, wild, unwearied, to the strand
 They struggle – now they touch the land! 
They come – ’tis but to add to slaughter –
 His heart’s best blood is on the water. 

XXV.

Escaped from shot, unharmed by steel,
 Or scarcely grazed its force to feel,
 Had Selim won – betrayed, beset –
 To where the strand and billows met. 
There, as his last step left the land,
 And the last death-blow dealt his hand,
 Ah, wherefore did he turn to look
 For her his eye but sought in vain? 
That pause, that fatal gaze he took,
 Hath doomed his death, or fixed his chain. 
Sad proof, in peril and in pain
 How late will lover’s hope remain! 
His back was to the dashing spray –
 Behind, but close, his comrades lay –
 When, at the instant, hissed the ball:
 ‘So may the foes of Giaffir fall!’ 
Whose voice is heard? Whose carbine rang? 
Whose bullet through the night-air sang
 Too nearly, deadly, aimed to err? 
’Tis thine, Abdallah’s murderer! 
The father slowly rued thy hate,
 The son hath found a quicker fate:
 Fast from his breast the blood is bubbling,
 The whiteness of the sea-foam troubling –
 If aught his lips essayed to groan,
 The rushing billows choked the tone! 

XXVI.

Morn slowly rolls the clouds away,
 Few trophies of the fight are there. 
The shouts that shook the midnight-bay
 Are silent; but some signs of fray
 That strand of strife may bear,
 And fragments of each shivered brand;
 Steps stamped; and, dashed into the sand,
 The print of many a struggling hand
 May there be marked – nor far remote
 A broken torch, an oarless boat. 
And, tangled on the weeds that heap
 The beach where shelving to the deep,
 There lies a white capote! 
’Tis rent in twain – one dark-red stain
 The wave yet ripples o’er in vain –
 But where is he who wore? 
Ye, who would o’er his relics weep,
 Go, seek them where the surges sweep
 Their burden round Sigaeum’s steep
 And cast on Lemnos’ shore. 
The sea-birds shriek above the prey,
 O’er which their hungry beaks delay,
 As shaken on his restless pillow
 His head heaves with the heaving billow. 
That hand, whose motion is not life,
 Yet freely seems to menace strife,
 Flung by the tossing tide on high,
 Then levelled with the wave –
 What recks it, though that corse shall lie
 Within a living grave? 
The bird that tears that prostrate form
 Hath only robbed the meaner worm! 
The only heart, the only eye,
 Had bled or wept to see him die,
 Had seen those scattered limbs composed,
 And mourned above his turban-stone –
 That heart hath burst, that eye was closed,
 Yea – closed before his own! 

XXVII.

By Helle’s stream there is a voice of wail! 
And woman’s eye is wet, man’s cheek is pale. 
Zuleika – last of Giaffir’s race –
 Thy destined lord is come too late:
 He sees not, ne’er shall see, thy face! 
Can he not hear
 The loud wull-wulley warn his distant ear? 
Thy handmaids weeping at the gate,
 The Koran-chanters of the hymn of fate,
 The silent slaves with folded arms that wait,
 Sighs in the hall, and shrieks upon the gale,
 Tell him thy tale. 
Thou didst not view thy Selim fall:
 That fearful moment when he left the cave
 Thy heart grew chill! 
He was thy hope, thy joy, thy love, thine all,
 And that last thought on him thou couldst not save
 Sufficed to kill –
 Burst forth in one wild cry, and all was still! 
Peace to thy broken heart and virgin grave! 
Ah happy, but of life to lose the worst –
 That grief, though deep, though fatal, was thy first! 
Thrice happy, ne’er to feel or fear the force
 Of absence, shame, pride, hate, revenge, remorse,
 And oh, that pang where more than madness lies –
 The worm that will not sleep, and never dies –
 Thought of the gloomy day and ghastly night,
 That dreads the darkness, and yet loathes the light,
 That winds around, and tears, the quivering heart! 
Ah, wherefore not consume it, and depart? 
Woe to thee, rash and unrelenting chief! 
Vainly thou heapst the dust upon thy head,
 Vainly the sackcloth o’er thy limbs dost spread –
 By that same hand Abdallah, Selim, bled! 
Now let it tear thy beard in idle grief:
 Thy pride of heart, thy bride for Osman’s bed,
 She whom thy Sultan had but seen to wed,
 Thy daughter’s dead! 
Hope of thine age, thy twilight’s lonely beam,
 The star hath set that shone on Helle’s stream –
 What quenched its ray? The blood that thou hast shed. 
Hark to the hurried question of despair:
 ‘Where is my child?’ An echo answers, ‘Where!’ 
