Buonaparte

I

When the earth swallows the cities that cover her,
When the wind scatters wandering plagues far and wide, when fiery peaks quake,
When howling hurricanes occur,
The God of vengeance is awake.
And if our world dares to defy that fateful event
Until heaven’s mercy is spent,
Then a man emerges,
A living scourge under the command
Of the doom-dealing Hand,
And he snatches the prey from those sightless scourges!

Sometimes men, chosen and blasted by the Almighty’s rage,
Have passed among mankind.
Rulers inheriting Nimrod’s mind —
Conquerors armed with a dreadful curse for an age
And then overthrown by a curse —
Have governed the guilty lands
With swordthrusts and firebrands;
Those messengers of Heaven have appeared to the universe
In all their blasphemous glory, where countless evils dwell,
As if they had risen from Hell!

II

Once, when the queen of nations
Broke free from her lawful plans,
Stepped down from her royal foundations
And played the harlot with partisans,
Within that chaos, foul and unclean,
The regicide dragon could be seen
Whelping a despot, an army-camp head.
Often the ocean in its disdain
Devours a fertile plain,
And a black volcano is vomited.

First he set out, leading the mob, to disturb the Nile’s catacombs;
There, hastily fighting, he went,
As if to insult the tyrants in their sepulchred homes
From his conqueror’s tent.
He returned, and his fellow soldiers bowed down.
Illustrious France, in tears,
Vainly looked forward to better years;
When he trampled on the old pharaohs’ crown,
Oblivious of all the vacuity they had known,
What he dreamed above their mighty tombs was merely a mighty throne!

Royal blood stained his usurping purple cape;
The treacherous man of war struck down another man of war
At Vincennes Anarchy admired her ape,
At the Louvre she worshipped her emperor.
The Roman Priest-King said
A blessing on his ominous head —
To anoint this mortal, almost a God seemed imperative.
Surely at heart he was racked by guilt:
On his crown blood had been spilt,
And he wished to receive it from hands that offer to forgive.

III

When he pleases, the God of all comfort and joy,
Who delivers transgressors into an evildoer’s hand,
Shatters the terrible plaything, the toy
With which he has scourged the whole land.
The man raised up by God for one brief pause
Claims to rule the earth alone
And falls asleep in oblivious pride —
Till at last, defying the common laws,
Just when he thinks fortune is all his own,
The wraith slips from the giant’s side!

IV

In the darkness of crime, in the brilliance of victory,
That man, forgetting the God by whom he was sent,
Paraded his guards from town to town
And marched with the help of his glorious renown.
On the way, the ravages of his regiment
Reduced the Spaniards to slavery
Before the eyes of the Scots;
And when he brought home his patriots
And lavished festivities on that abject but conquering race,
His guests were the kings they had thrown from their place!

Ten vanquished empires became his provinces.
That did not satisfy his fatal discontent;
He wished to rest only among royal hostages
On a throne that spanned a whole continent.
From twenty disparate skies, his eagles led forth
His vast battalions outspread in formation
Toward the north;
But there his bold progress met its fate.
The nations had fallen asleep; their great
Awakening dawned in a bloody conflagration

He fell, a mere king a ghost enemy; then
Made one last attempt to restore
His fortunes and go on his way once more,
Never stumbling again;
But at last,
Far away from his tyranny, to overwhelm
His crushed pride with a united countercheck,
This greatest of prisoners was cast
On a bare rock, itself the wreck
Left by some long-engulfed realm!

There, growing cold like a lava wave,
That stump of a tyrant awoke as a slave,
Held captive by his captives, expelled from his sphere —
He had merely changed his chains.
He could hear the fanfare of the now-restored reigns
And his light could be seen on the distant frontier,
Like a lighthouse marking a reef for the mariner.
He died. — When our cities heard of his death,
Once more the wrath-laden world could draw breath:
It was free from its prisoner!

So pride, that colossus born from a breath and cast down by a glance,
Goes astray in its glittering advance.
He turned sword into sceptre, throne into tent.
His whole reign was belligerent.
He shuddered, this king of the world,
At the very scourge that had made him rise;
His soldierly valour was praised to the skies.
Down into the chasm of his soul he was hurled;
He travelled through villainy and success,
He reached only wretchedness.

V

You nations, who marvel at
The committers and victims of crime,
Let him flee alone down the halls of time —
Heroes are not like that.
These false gods are honoured for an hour,
But the future despises their power;
They deceive you while you dream,
Like some nocturnal gleam
Through which brilliant meteors may run,
But they fail to herald the sun.
