Response to an Indictment

So, it is I who am the ogre and the scapegoat. 
In this century’s chaos where your heart sinks,
 I have trampled good taste and old-fashioned French verse
 Under my feet, and, hideous, I have said to the shadow, ‘Be!’ 
And there was shadow. – That is your charge. 
Language, tragedy, art, dogmas, conservatory,
 All that clarity is extinguished, and I am
 The one to blame, and I emptied the urn of nights. 
I am the inept mattock who brought it all down;
 That’s your point of view. All right, fine, I accept it;
 It is I whom your angry prose has chosen;
 You shout at me: Racca; I say to you, Thanks! 
This march of time, which leaves one church
 Only to go into another, and which becomes civilized;
 These great questions of art and liberty,
 Let us see them, I agree, from the least side,
 And through the wrong end of the telescope. In short,
 I admit it, yes, I am that abominable man;
 And, although, in truth, I think that I have committed
 Other crimes in addition which you have omitted,
 I’ve touched a little on the obscure questions,
 I’ve probed the hurts, I’ve searched for cures,
 Insulted the old baggage of old mulishness,
 Shaken the past from top to bottom,
 And sacked the meaning just as much as the form,
 I limit myself to this: I am this enormous monster
 I am the horrible, overblowing demagogue
 And the destroyer of the old ABCD. 
Let’s talk. 
When I left school, and Latin translations,
 And Latin verses, shy, a rather wan
 And serious child, with bent head, with weak limbs;
 When, trying to understand and judge, I opened
 My eyes to nature and art, the language,
 People and nobility, was the image of the kingdom;
 Poetry was the monarchy; a word
 Was a duke and a peer, or was nothing but a scoundrel;
 Syllables, no more than Paris and London,
 Did not mix; as they go without mingling
 Walkers and riders crossing the Pon’Neuf;
 The language was the State before ’89;
 Words, well - or low-born, lived penned in castes;
 These, noble, haunting Phaedras and Jocastas,
 Meropes, having decorum as their law,
 And going to Versailles to the king’s carriages;
 The others, a pile of beggars, sinister rogues,
 Living in dialects; some in the chain gangs
 Of slang; devoted to every low genre,
 Torn into rags in the markets; without stockings,
 Without wig; created for prose and farce;
 Populace of the style in the depths of the scattered shadow;
 Villeins, oafs, yokels, which Vaugelas their chief
 Had marked with an F in the work-camp of Lexicon;
Expressing only abject, familiar life,
 Vile, degraded, withered, bourgeois, good for Molière. 
Racine looked askance at these rascals;
 If Corneille found one nestling in his verse,
 He kept it, too great to say: Let it be gone. 
And Voltaire cried: Corneille is slumming
 That humble fellow Corneille kept quiet. 
So, brigand, I came; I cried: Why
 These always ahead, those always behind? 
And on the Academy, ancestor and dowager,
 Hiding under her skirts the frightened tropes,
 And on the square battalions of alexandrines,
 I caused a revolutionary wind to blow. 
I put a Liberty cap on the old dictionary. 
Now no word is a senator! no word is a commoner! 
I made a tempest in the depths of the inkwell,
 And I mixed, among the overflowing shadows,
 With the black people of words the white swarm of ideas;
 And I said: No word where the pure-flighted idea
 Cannot land, all damp with blue! 
Awful speech! – Syllepsis, hypallage, litotes,
 Trembled; I climbed onto Aristotle’s milestone,
 And declared words equal, free, adult. 
All the invaders and all the destroyers,
 All these tigers, the Huns, the Scythians, the Dacians,
 Were mere lapdogs next to my daring;
 I bounded out of the circle and broke the compass. 
I called the pig by its name; why not? 
Guicchiardini named Borgia! Tacitus
 Named Vitellius! Implacable, explicit beast,
 I removed the collar of epithet from the neck of the stupefied dog;
 In the grass, in the shade of the covert
 I made the cow and the heifer fraternize,
 One being Margoton and the other Berenice. 
Then the ode, kissing Rabelais, became drunk;
 On the summit of Pindus they were dancing ‘Ça ira;’
 The nine muses, bare-breasted, were singing the Carmagnole;
 Emphasis shivered in her Spanish ruff;
 Jean the donkey-herder married the shepherdess Myrtle. 
A king was heard to say, ‘What time is it?’ 
I massacred alabaster, and snow, and ivory,
 I removed the jet from the sloe-eye
 And I dared to say to the arm: Be plain white. 
I desecrated the steaming corpse of poetry
 I caused numbers to enter it; O terror! Mithridates
 Could have cited the date of the siege of Cyzicus. 
Days of dread! the Laďs became trollops. 
Many words, groomed by Restaut every morning,
 And keeping an air of Louis XIV about them,
 Still wore wigs; the Revolution
 Shouted at this hairstyle, from the top of her belfry,
 ‘Transform! it’s time. Fill yourself
 With the soul of those words which you hold prisoner!’ 
And then the wig roared, and was a mane. 
Liberty! It is thus that in our rebellions,
 Out of spaniels we made lions,
 And that, under the accursed hurricane which we blew,
 All kinds of words were covered in flames. 
I put up proclamations on Lhomond. 
They read, ‘We must finish with this! 
To the basket with the Bouhours, the Batteux, the Brossettes! 
They put shackles on human thought. 
To arms, prose and verse! Form your battalions! 
See where we are: the strophe has been gagged! 
The ode is in irons, drama is in a cell. 
On the dead Racine swarms the Campistron. ’
 Boileau ground his teeth; I said to him: From now on,
 Silence! and I shouted in the lightning and the wind:
 War on rhetoric and peace to syntax! 
And ’93 exploded. On their axis
 We saw the athos, the ithos and the pathos tremble. 
The matacchinos dropping Pourceaugnac and Cathos,
 Pursuing Dumarsais in their hideous dance,
 Filled their reeds with the waves of the Permessus. 
The syllable, climbing over the law which sorted it,
 The peasantish substantive, the pariah verb,
 Came running. Horror was drunk to the dregs. 
They were seen to disinter Atalie’s dream;
 They scattered to the winds the ashes of
 Theramen’s story; and the star Institute dimmed. 
Yes, they made a clean sweep of the Ancien Régime,
 And I clapped my hands, drinker of sentences’ blood,
 When I saw by the foaming stanza, and saying
 Things in an enormous, roaring style,
 Poesy collared in the street,
 And when I saw, among the rushing crowd,
 Hanging, by all the words which good tastes proscribes,
 The aristocratic letter on the mind’s lantern. 
Yes, I am this Danton! I am this Robespierre! 
I have, against the noble word with the long rapier,
 Roused the ignoble term, its valet,
 And I have, on dead Dangeau, cut Richelet’s throat. 
Yes, it’s true, these are some of my crimes. 
I took and demolished the Bastille of rhymes. 
I did more: I broke all the iron collars
 Which bound the word ‘people,’ and pulled from hell
 All the old damned words, sepulchral legions;
 I crushed the spirals of periphrasis,
 And mingled, mixed, and leveled under Heaven
 The alphabet, somber tower born of Babel,
 And I was not unaware that the wrathful hand
 Which delivers the word, delivers thought. 
Unity is the attribute of man’s efforts. 
All is the same arrow, all strikes the same target. 
Thus, I admit it, there, laid out in an honest style,
 Several of my crimes, and I present my head. 
You must be old, then, papa,
 For the tenth time, I say my mea culpa. 
Yes, if Beauzée is god, it’s true, I’m an atheist. 
Language was in order, august, dusted,
 Golden fleurs-de-lis, Tristan and Boileau, blue ceiling,
 The forty chairs and the throne in the center;
 I disturbed it, and I, in this illustrious room,
 Well, I broke everything; the proper word, that lout,
 Was only a corporal; I made it a colonel;
 I made a Jacobin of the personal pronoun,
 Of the participle, that white-haired slave,
 A hyena, and of the verb a hydra of anarchy. 
You hold the reum confitentem. Roar! 
I said to the nostril: But you’re just a nose! 
I said to the long golden fruit: But you’re just a pear! 
I said to Vaugelas: You’re just a jawbone! 
I said to the words: Be a republic! be
 The immense anthill, and work! Believe,
 Love, live! – I shook up everything, and, morose,
 I threw the noble verse to the black dogs of prose. 
And, that which I did, others did also;
 Better than I. Calliope, Euterpe with the transfixed tone,
 Polyhymnia, lost their spurious gravity. 
We topple the balance of the hemistich. 
It is true, curse us. The verse, which, on its forehead
 Formerly wore a circlet of twelve plumes,
 And ceaselessly jumped on the double racket
 Called prosody and etiquette,
 Now breaks the ruler and fools the chisel,
 And escapes, a shuttlecock which becomes a bird,
 From the cesura’s cage, and flees toward the ravine,
 And flies in the heavens, a divine lark. 
All words now soar in brightness. 
Writers have set the language free. 
And, thanks to these bandits, thanks to these terrorists,
 The true, driving out the swarm of sad pedagogues,
 The imagination, rowdy with one hundred voices,
 Which breaks the windowpanes in the minds of the bourgeois;
 Three-faced poetry, which laughs, sighs,
 And sings; mocks and believes; which Plautus and Shakespeare
 Scattered, one on the plebs, the other on the mob;
 Which pours out on the nations with wisdom of Job
 And the reason of Horace through its madness;
 Which the immense frenzy of blue intoxicates,
 And which, sacred madwoman with dazzling glances,
 Climbs to eternity on the steps of time,
 The muse reappears, takes us back, leads us back,
 Begins anew to weep over human misery,
 Strikes and consoles, goes from the zenith to the nadir,
 And makes on every forehead shine and gleam
 Her flight, whirlwind, lyre, hurricane of sparks,
 And her millions of eyes on her millions of wings. 
The movement thus completes its action. 
Thanks to you, holy progress, the Revolution
 Vibrates today in the air, in the voice, in the book,
 In the palpitating word the reader feels her live;
 She shouts, she sings, she teaches, she laughs. 
Her tongue is loosed as is her mind. 
She is in the novel, whispering to women. 
She opens now two eyes that hold two flames,
 One on the citizen, the other on the thinker. 
She takes her sister Liberty by the hand,
 And makes her enter through the pores of every man. 
The prejudices, formed, like the madrepore,
 From the dark crowding of abuses over time,
 Dissolve at the shock of all the floating words,
 Full of her will, of her goal, of her soul. 
She is prose, she is verse, she is drama;
 She is expression, she is sentiment,
 Lantern in the street, star in the firmament. 
She enters into the depths of the unfathomable language. 
She breathes into art, formidable megaphone,
 And, as God wills, after having filled
 The people with her pride, erased the old crease
 From their foreheads, and raised up the degraded crowd,
 And having made herself the law, she makes herself the Idea! 
