The Bronze Horseman

A Tale of St. Petersburg

Introduction

On a shore washed by desolate waves, he stood,
Full of high thoughts, and gazed info the distance.
The broad river rushed before him; a wretched skiff
Sped, on it in solitude. Here and there,
Like black specks on the mossy, marshy banks,
Were huts, the shelter of the hapless Finn;
And forest, never visited by rays
Of the mist-shrouded sun, rustled all round.

And he thought: From here we will outface the Swede;
To spite our haughty neighbour I shall found
A city here. By nature we are fated
To cut a window through to Europe,
To stand with a firm foothold on the sea
Ships of every flag, on waves unknown
To them, will come to visit us, and we
Shall revel in the open sea.

A hundred years have passed, and the young city,
The grace and wonder of the northern lands,
Out of the gloom of forests and the mud
Of marshes splendidly has risen; where once
The Finnish fisherman, the sad stepson
Of nature, standing alone on the low banks,
Cast into unknown waters his worn net,
Now huge harmonious palaces and towers
Crowd on the bustling banks; ships in their throngs
Speed from all ends of the earth to the rich quays;
The Neva is clad in granite; bridges hang
Poised over her waters; her islands are covered
With dark-green gardens, and before the younger
Capital, ancient Moscow has grown pale,
Like a widow in purple before a new empress.

I love you, Peter’s creation, I love your stern
Harmonious look, the Neva’s majestic flow,
Her granite banks, the iron tracery
Of your railings, the transparent twilight and
The moonless glitter of your pensive nights,
When in my room I write or read without
A lamp, and slumbering masses of deserted
Streets shine clearly, and the Admiralty spire
Is luminous, and, without letting in
The dark of night to golden skies, one dawn
Hastens to relieve another, granting
A mere half-hour to night. I love
The motionless air and frost of your harsh winter,
The sledges coursing along the solid Neva,
Girls 'faces brighter than roses, and the sparkle
And noise and sound of voices at the balls,
And, at the hour of the bachelor’s feast, the hiss
Of foaming goblets and the pale-blue flame
Of punch. I love the warlike energy
Of Mars' Field, the uniform beauty of the troops.
Of infantry and of the horses, tattered
Remnants of those victorious banners in array
Harmoniously swaying, the gleam of those
Bronze helmets, shot through in battle. O martial
Capital, I love the smoke and thunder
Of your fortress, when the empress of the north
Presents a son to the royal house, or when
Russia celebrates another victory
Over the foe, or when the Neva, breaking
Her blue ice, bears it to the seas, exulting,
Scenting spring days.

Flaunt your beauty, Peter’s
City, and stand unshakeable like Russia,
So that even the conquered elements may make
Tneir peace with you; let the Finnish waves
forget their enmity and ancient bondage,
And let them not disturb with empty spite
Peter's eternal sleep!

There was a dreadful time — the memory of it
Is still fresh ... I will begin my narrative
Of it for you, my friends. My tale will be sad.

1

November over darkened Petrograd.
With a roar of waves splashing against the edges
Of her shapely bounds, the Neva tossed
Like a sick man in his restless bed.
It was already late and dark; against
The window angrily the rain was beating,
And the wind blew, howling sadly. At that time
Came young Yevgeni home, from friends ... We’ll call
Our hero by this name. It’s pleasant, and
Has long been congenial to my pen.
We do not need his surname, though perhaps
In times gone by it shone, under the pen
Of Karamzin, rang forth in our native legends;
But now it is forgotten by the world
And fame. Our hero lives in Kolomna, works
Somewhere, avoids the paths of the famous, mourns
Neither dead relatives nor the forgotten past.

And so, having come home, Yevgeni tossed
His cloak aside, undressed, lay down. But for
A long time could not fall asleep, disturbed
By divers thoughts. What did he think about?
About the fact that he was poor, by toil
Would have to earn honour and independence;
That God might have granted him more brains and money;
That there are lazy devils, after all,
For whom life is so easy! That he had been
A clerk for two years; he also thought the weather
Was not becoming any calmer; that
The river was still rising; as like as not,
The bridges on the Neva had been raised,
And for two or three days he would be cut off
From Parasha. At that point Yevgeni sighed
From his heart, and fell to dreaming like a poet.

“Get married? Me? Why not! It would be hard,
Of course; but then, I’m young and healthy, ready
To toil day and night; somehow or other
I'll fix myself a humble, simple shelter
Where Parasha and I can live in quiet.
After a year or two I'll get a job,
And Parasha will bring up our children ... Then
We shall begin to live, and thus we’ll go
Hand in hand to the grave, and our grandchildren
Will bury us”

Thus he dreamed. And he felt sad that night,
And wished the wind would not howl gloomily,
The rain not beat so angrily at the window ...
At last he closed his sleepy eyes. And now
The foul night thins, and the pale day draws on ...
The dreadful day!
All night the Neva rushed
Towards the sea against the storm, unable
To overcome the madness of the winds ...
She could no longer carry on the struggle ...
By morning, throngs of people on her banks
Admired the spray, the mountains and the foam
Of maddened waters. But harried by the gale
Out of the gulf, the Neva turned back, angry,
Turbulent, and swamped the islands. The weather
Raged more fiercely, Neva swelled up and roared,
Bubbling like a cauldron; suddenly
Hurled herself on the city like a beast.
Everything ran before her, everything
Suddenly became deserted — suddenly
The waters flowed into the cellars underground,
The canals surged up to the railings,
And Petropolis floated up, like Triton,
Plunged to the waist in water.

Siege! Assault! The sly waves climb like thieves
Through the windows. Scudding boats smash the panes
With their sterns. Hawkers’ trays, fragments of huts,
Beams, roofs, the wares of thrifty trading,
The chattels of pale poverty, bridges swept
Away by the storm, coffins from the buried
Cemetery — all float along the streets!
The people gaze upon the wrath of God
And await their doom. Alas! All’s swept away:
Shelter and food — where shall they find them?
In that dread year the late Tsar in his glory
Still ruled Russia. He came out on to the balcony,
Sad, troubled, and said: “Tsars cannot master
The divine elements.” He sat down and with thoughtful
Sorrowful eyes gazed on the dire disaster:
The squares like lakes; broad rivers of streets
Pouring into them. The palace a sad island.
The Tsar spoke — from end to end of the city,
Along streets near and far, a dangerous journey
Through the storm waters, generals set off
To save the people, drowning in their homes.

There, in Peter’s square, where in the corner
A new house towers, where over the lofty porch
Two guardian lions stand like living creatures
With upraised paws — there sat, astride the marble
Beast, hatless, his arms crossed tightly,
Motionless and fearfully pale, Yevgeni.
He was afraid, poor fellow, not for himself.
He did not hear the greedy billow rise,
Lapping his soles; he did not feel the rain
Lashing his face, nor the wind, wildly howling,
Tear his hat from his head. His desperate gaze
Was fixed on one distant point. Like mountains,
There the waves rose up from the seething depths,
And raged, there the storm howled, there wreckage
Rushed to and fro ... God! God! There —
Alas! — so dose to the waves, almost by the gulf
Itself, is an unpainted fence and a willow
And a small ramshackle house: there they live,
A widow and her daughter, Parasha, his dream ...
Or is all this a dream? Is all our life
Nothing but an empty dream, heaven’s jest?

And he, as though bewitched, as if riveted,
To the marble, cannot get down! Around him
Is water and nothing else! And, his back turned
To him, in unshakeable eminence, over
The angry river, the turbulent Neva, stands
The Image, with outstretched arm, on his bronze horse.

2

But now, satiated with destruction, wearied
By her insolent violence, the Neva drew back,
Revelling in the chaos she had caused,
And carelessly abandoning her booty.
Thus a marauder, bursting, into the village with
His savage band, smashes, slashes, shatters,
And robs; shrieks, gnashing of teeth, violence,
Oaths, panic, howls! And weighed down by their plunder,
Fearing pursuit, exhausted, the robbers leave
For home, dropping their plunder on the way.

The water fell, the roadway was visible,
And my Yevgeni, in hope and fear and grief,
Hastened with sinking heart to the scarcely abated
River. But full of their victory the waves
Still seethed angrily, as though beneath them
Fires were smouldering; foam still covered them,
And heavily the Neva breathed, like a horse
Galloping home from battle. Yevgeni looks:
He sees a boat; he runs towards his find;
Shouts to the ferryman — and for ten kopecks
The carefree ferryman rows him across the billows.

And long the experienced oarsman struggled with
The stormy waves, and all the time the skiff
Was on the point of plunging with its rash crew
To the depths, between the ranges of the waves
— And at last he reached the bank.
The wretched man
Runs down a familiar street to familiar places.
He gazes, and can recognize nothing.
A dreadful vision! All is piled up before him:
This has been hurled down, that has been torn away;
The little houses have become twisted, others
Have completely collapsed, others have been shifted
By the waves; all around, as on a battlefield,
Corpses are strewn. Yevgeni rushes headlong,
Remembering nothing, exhausted by torments,
To the place where fate awaits him with unknown tidings,
As with a sealed letter. And now he is
Already rushing through the suburb, and here
Is the bay, and close by is the house ...
What is this? ...
He stopped. Went back and turned.
Looked ... walked forward ... looked again.
Here is the place where their house stood;
Here is the willow. There were gates here — swept
Away, evidently. But where is the house?
And, full of gloomy anxiety, he walks, he walks
Around, talks loudly to himself — and then,
Striking his forehead with his hand, he laughed.
Darkness fell upon the city, shaking
With terror; long its people did not sleep,
But talked among themselves of the past day.
Dawn’s light shone over the pale capital
And found no trace of the disaster; loss
Was covered by a purple cloak. And life
Resumed its customary order. People
Walked coldly, impassively, along cleared streets.
Government officials, leaving their night’s shelter,
Went to their jobs. The indomitable tradesman
Opened his cellar looted by the Neva,
Hoping to make good his loss at his neighbour’s expense.
Boats were being hauled away from courtyards.
Already Count Khvostov, beloved of heaven,
Was singing the disaster of Neva’s banks
In his immortal verses.

But my poor, poor
Yevgeni! ... Alas! his confused mind could not endure
The shocks he had suffered. His ears still heard
The boom of Neva and the winds. Silently
He wandered round, filled with dreadful thoughts.
Some sort of dream tormented him. A week,
A month, went by — still he did not go home.
When the time ran out, his landlord leased
His abandoned nook to a poor poet. Yevgeni
Did not come to collect his belongings. He grew
A stranger to the world. All day he wandered
On foot, and slept at night on the embankment;
He fed on scraps handed to him through windows,
Tattered and mouldy grew his shabby clothes,
Children threw stones at him. Often the whips
Of coachmen lashed him, for he could not find his way;
It seemed he noticed nothing, deafened by
An inner turmoil. And so he dragged out his life,
Neither beast nor man, neither this nor that,
Not of the living world nor of the dead ...
Once he was sleeping on the Neva banks.
The days of summer were declining towards autumn.
A sickly wind was breathing. The sullen wave
Splashed against the embankment, reproachfully
Grumbling and beating against the smooth steps,
Like a petitioner at the door of judges
Who keep turning him away. The poor wretch woke.
It was dark: rain dripped, the wind howled gloomily;
A distant watchman traded cries with it.
Yevgeni started up; recalled his nightmare;
Hastily he set off wandering, until
He suddenly stopped — and slowly began to cast
His eyes around, with wild fear on his face.
He found himself at the foot of the pillars of
The great house. Over the porch the lions stood
On guard, like living creatures, with their paws
Upraised; and eminently dark and high
Above the railed-in rock, with arm outstretched,
The Image, mounted on his horse of bronze.

Yevgeni shuddered. Terribly his thoughts
Grew clear in him. He recognized the place
Where the flood played, where greedy waves had pressed,
Rioting round him angrily, and the lions,
And the square, and him who motionlessly
Held aloft his bronze head in the darkness,
Him by whose fateful will the city had
Been founded on the sea ... How terrible
He was in the surrounding murk! What thought
Was on his brow, what strength was hidden in him!
And in that steed what fire! Where do you gallop,
Proud steed, and where will you plant your hoofs?
O mighty master of fate! was it not thus,
Towering on the precipice’s brink,
You reared up Russia with your iron curb?

The poor madman walked around the pedestal
Of the Image, and brought wild looks to bear
On the countenance of the lord of half the world.
His breast contracted, his brow was pressed against
The cold railings, his eyes were sealed by mist,
Flames ran through his heart, his blood boiled.
Sombrely he stood before the statue;
His teeth clenched, his hands tightened, trembling
With wrath, possessed by a dark power, he whispered:
“All right then, wonder-worker, just you wait!”
And suddenly set off running at breakneck speed.
It seemed to him that the face of the dead Tsar,
Momentarily flaring up with rage,
Was slowly turning ... Across the empty square
He runs, and hears behind him — like the rumble
Of thunder — the clash and clangor of hoofs
Heavily galloping over the shaking square.
And lit by the pale moonlight, stretching out
His hand aloft, the Bronze Horseman rushes
After him on his ponderously galloping mount;
And all night long, wherever the madman ran,
The Bronze Horseman followed with a ringing clatter.

And from that time, whenever his wanderings took him
Into that square, confusion appeared on his face.
Hastily he would press his hand to his heart,
As though to ease its torment, he would doff
His tattered cap, he would not raise his troubled
Eyes and would go on by some roundabout way.

A small island can be seen off-shore. Sometimes
A fisherman out late will moor there with
His net and cook his meagre supper. Or
Some civil servant, boating on a Sunday,
Will pay a visit to the barren island.
No grass grows, not a blade. The flood, in sport,
Had driven a ramshackle little house there.
Above the water it had taken root
Like a black bush. Last spring a wooden barge
Carried away the wreckage. By the threshold
They found my madman, and on that very spot
For the love of God they buried his cold corpse.
