ROMANTIC PERIOD POETRY ARCHIVE
------------------------------

Links:
 NEURON: https://ronjournal.org/neuron/
 Romantic Circles: https://romantic-circles.org/ 
 BL Romantic collection: https://www.bl.uk/romantics-and-victorians/works?literaryperiod=romantic
 BARS: http://www.bars.ac.uk/ (member since 2018)
 Lynch: https://andromeda.rutgers.edu/~jlynch/Lit/romantic.html
 VoS: http://vos.ucsb.edu/browse.asp?id=2750
 KSAA/BSA: https://romantics200.org/
 RC: https://www.rc.umd.edu/
 CATH: http://lordbyron.org/
 Tools: https://wiki.digitalmethods.net/Dmi/ToolDatabase
 Bibl. metadata relations: https://snaccooperative.org/
 Multilingual DH: https://github.com/multilingual-dh/nlp-resources
 REVE: https://www.euromanticism.org/virtual-exhibition/

Motivation:
 * I wanted a new project after ECPA end of beta (I did the traditional author
   archive [TGA], did the traditional period corpus [ECPA], want something
   else...)
 * I wanted to extend my interests into the Romantic period for a while, but I
   didn't just want to repeat ECPA for the later period
 * Decided to shift the focus for the new project in two ways: 1. use the
   opportunity of a fundamentally Global Romantic movement to embrace
   global multi-lingualism/-culturalism, and 2. shift away from the detailed
   monolingual study (and DH) to a genuine comparative literary approach (will
   also embrace a multilingual DH, e.g. re. NLP, tools, and methods)
 * My interest in comparative literature goes back to my student days (I
   originally wanted to study it at university), it is also fundamentally
   open-ended and lends itself to new approaches (network-analysis of authors
   and works; contexts [similarities etc.]; translations; other arts
   [cultures]; theoretical texts; narrative, poetic, and dramatic works; corpus
   creation and analysis; topic modelling; potential for a connection with
   ongoing distant reading efforts [trends/patterns/developments]; etc.)
 * A further motivation is the idea to engage with new tools and technologies,
   as well as new programming languages (Python, CoreNLP, NLTK, SpaCy, R, etc.)

Research new project (feasibility):
 * What resources are available out there that cover the same or similar
   ground? - check NEURON links !
 * What Romanticism conferences/journals cover romanticism
   globally/Europe-wide? BARS, ICR, GER, NASSR, etc.
 * What are the high-quality full-text archives for the different languages?
   (German: DTA, English: ?, Spanish: ?, French: ?, Italian: ?, Portuguese: ?,
   American: ?, Russian: ?, ...)
 * TextGrid has a collection of poetic texts in German and other languages
   (mined from zeno.org)
 * Aim is to get XML/TEI encoded corpora for all languages, if not attainable,
   then (semi-automatic) transformation workflow will be necessary, starting
   from reliable e-texts/epubs/PDF
 * I can now use any EPUB/KINDLE/PDF format from any e-book store for content,
   that includes all foreign-language Kindle books (poetry anthologies etc.),
   Romantic language-specific collections or single authors.  I can just go
   through any print anthology or useful book I have and see if it exists as an
   e-book anywhere --- it seems the least lossy option to convert the e-book to
   DOC/RTF and then use TEI P5 stylesheets (OxGarage) to convert to basic P5
   (primary texts are not copyrightable)
 * any books that cover "Weltliteratur" will be relevant for this project,
   particularly Frenzel, /Stoffe/ and /Motive/, but really any study with a
   general or comparative approach, e.g. Ferber's /Literary Symbols/
 * a large body of knowledge is already encoded in books, indices, subjects,
   names, i.e. make sure to use ALL parts of a book particularly when they make
   connections (always acknowledge use of any secondary materials in editions
   or online)
   
Corpus-building:
 * I must try and avoid piece-meal creation of a corpus, instead I need to
   think big, both on primary and secondary (contexts) literatures, will mean
   less detailed markup of individual texts and more focus on contexts,
   including conscious corpus creation
 * I also need to be much more global than in ECPA re. the comprehensiveness, I
   need to look for and collect poetry not only in books, anthologies, but also
   in newspapers, magazines, and everywhere else it's available
 * I need to make a list of all sources, and create a transformation pipeline
   wherever there is substantial content to be found, rather than lots of
   manual editing (may lose some detail, but should gain quantity) ->
   transformation is from high-quality e-text sources via RTF to XML (ideally
   due to the same pre-processing steps, the markup-procedure should hopefully
   be scriptable [XSL etc.] to a large extent)
 * organization of materials is key for access and usability (languages,
   places, periods, dependent on relevant "national" Romanticisms)
 * key for the inclusion of external resources must be GLAM collections, these
   are hugely valuable, and sometimes unique, resources, which help increase
   the project's value by doing digitization on the side

Research angle of new project:
 * Romanticism would be an opportunity to think about bringing together poetry
   from the period globally (not just English-language, primarily in
   translation, but possibly also in its original form)
 * It is also an opportunity to go beyond purely poetry, and include relevant
   contexts from all genres of writing, and other arts, sciences, politics,
   etc.
 * Looks like a lot more multilingual tools are now available for NLP, make use
   of that for Romanticism project, e.g. spaCy, CoreNLP etc. (at least:
   English, German, French, Spanish, Italian, Portuguese), however, comparative
   literary studies acknowledges as its core not a language- or national
   literature-based approach (comparatists don't have their own 'national'
   literature)
 * create a list of multilingual tools for different tasks (topic modelling,
   clustering, PoS, Sentiment, NER, Frequencies/ngrams) when necessary (how to
   deal with translations)
 * assume that language isn't an issue by combining originals and translations
   as and when they are available, have a consistent approach however to
   recording crucial metadata also at least in English (names, titles,
   language, date, orig/trans, etc.)
 * interesting opportunities for modelling relationships between authors,
   works, etc. across Europe and the world (comparative part of comparative
   lit.)
 * given the language-agnostic conceptualization, it is crucial for me to have
   an almost equally substantial corpus of contextual literature, e.g. major
   volumes in the project's data/ folder marked up and encoded
 * for ALL texts (primary and contextual) it will be crucial to record the
   language of the original, it will determine whether the context for a text
   is within the context of a national philology or a topic for comparative
   lit.
 * Unlike TGA and ECPA, RPPA will from the outset be a profoundly networked
   nexus of all and any information available on the topic on the Web
   (Wikidata, wikiba.se [offers more control?!], lots of other resources). Its
   outstanding feature will be that it will combine highest level quality
   e-texts with a rich and interwoven web of external resources that will
   richly contextualize every text and author.  It will be key to give all
   texts, authors, and other materials a host of IDs from the outset, this will
   be infinitely more crucial than any detailed TEI markup of texts or creation
   of personography beyond the most basic collection of API-able IDs for each
   text, author, and context I include. These IDs should allow for the
   offline/online creation of extremely rich contextual clusters around people,
   works, contexts, etc.
 * I need to get better at obtaining buy-in from institutions/faculty/scholars
   to integrate the project in teaching/research/collaborations: one idea for
   RPPA would be to contribute a part of the archive as a stand-alone
   contribution (earlyish on) to https://romantic-circles.org/editions to make
   a name for myself as a Romanticist in the community, also possibly do a
   review of a digital resource for https://ronjournal.org/digital-reviews/
   (or https://romantic-circles.org/review-entries/types/29276)
 * It is key not only to amass data and present it in appealing and innovative
   ways, but to showcase use cases for academics to use/re-use/integrate the
   resource into their teaching/research
 * REVE offers a great opportunity for a collaboration, as both projects are
   embracing a European Romanticism (will need to see which objects can be
   related to poets/poems in RPPA).  Also REVE could become an "AI" of
   Romanticism, of microbiographies of objects, that in conversation, are able
   to create new knowledge ("museum machine")  -> BUT needs encoding as a
   knowledge graph, not as a BLOG post (this could be another angle of
   collaboration in light of ECPA knowledge modelling!)

Markup:
 * Adapt guidelines from ECPA, but needs additional mandatory fields:
   - @xml:lang (use consistently for texts, sections, titles, etc.)
   - div@type (could be "poem", "drama", "narrative", "prose")
   - div@subtype ("rppa", only items with this param are made part of RPPA)
   - div@ana ("#translation #trans_+ISO639-3" where applicable) How do I record
     the availability of a text in multiple languages, they need a common ID?
   - need to be able to have multiple expressions of a text, including versions
     and translations, need "work" ID to keep these aligned
   - dates of /composition/ and /publication/ consistently for everything!
   Any text can be a context in RPPA, so no use as a category, but for
   categorization: "rppa"+"poem" = primary, and "rppa"+other = secondary (left
   hand side of three-col display [text|context|text] MUST be primary, right
   hand can be primary or secondary)
 * For encoded primary text, it will be crucial to communicate the editorial
   choices (modernization, etc.) made in each of the editions in addition to
   recording the individual source editions of each of the texts
 * It will be key to mark up excerpts from poems using the notation given
   generally when referring to the parts, e.g. Childe Harold canot 4, as
   excerpts are likely to be found in anthologies and specificity of contexts
   will be fundamental! I should be able in the interface to just display
   stanza X of any longer poem
 * Key is to consciously loose the reliance of intricate interwoven markup, no
   need to continue author pages with biographies and bibliographies, or
   hand-created timelines, more important to curate lists of reliable
   identifiers that can be used to produce high-quality and consistent types of
   documents semi-automatically.
 * this will also mean a LOT less handish HTML and programming: the key idea is
   to move the various data providers (via analyses of their APIs) into data
   sources (e.g. JSON), which will then be picked up by scripts that produce
   websites automatically based on the underlying detail of data (shifting away
   from transforming a expertly and costly curated and encoded source files to
   pages), this can be a lot more global, e.g. using the original languages of
   the information provided rather than trying to provide costly curated
   uniformity
 * experiment with external services, there must be lots of free APIs to
   useful services, including Wikidata, DBpedia, but also catalogues, like
   VIAF, there's api.bnf.fr, must be similar for LoC, GND, CERL thesaurus,
   etc. corpusTracer displays images, dates, etc. for a person from Wikidata
   (via its API), implies a clear separation of local/external knowledge,
   which can be made transparent!, etc. [most services will have a simple API,
   which I should offer in all cases if an ID is known, e.g. VIAF id can be
   used to obtain WD id, which can then form the basis for a person object,
   same should be true of other entities (books, events, ideas, etc.)]
 * Data providers will be plentiful, particularly projects/organisations
   participating in LOD (e.g. Europeana, libraries, universities, projects,
   etc.). It will be key to closely anaylse the available underlying data, as
   it may well already contain useful connections with other datasets, e.g.
   linking an author to contemporaries, or a place to a "school", etc.

Tech/Website:
 * adopt latest versions of key components: Bootstrap 4, jQuery 3
 * use a new link colour for project after red for TGA and blue for ECPA
 * maybe need to be bolder with web design, adopt some more recent trends
 * key will be to leave outdated setup (Morphadorner in particular) behind,
   move ALL core tasks to modern maintained tools, e.g. adopt SpacY for
   tokenization (most of my texts in RPPA will probably be modernized)
   etc.  Also, I need to avoid non-standards for common tasks, e.g. get rid of
   NUPOS. 
 * Sequence alignment like that done for Digtial Voltaire (is this multi-lingual
   and open-source?) would be a great approach.  Need to make a list of texts to
   align primary texts against (e.g. in English: the KJ Bible, Shakespeare,
   Milton...)

Comparative literary studies as methodological approach (Hoffmann/Hutchinson):
 * focus is on comparison as a method, and literature in international and
   interdisciplinary contexts
 * comparative lit. is NOT concerned with: the entire oeuvre of an author, his
   biography, language as a system, its national literary context
 * comparative lit. IS concerned with: genres, motives and subjects, literary
   periods, its foreign national literary contexts (through translation), the
   sister arts, the contexts of cultural studies and sciences
 * In comparative lit., literary texts are ALWAYS considered (through
   comparison) in their contexts: the key method is comparison, the result is
   literature in contexts
 * In comparative lit. those contexts are outside of the national literature to
   which the text under consideration belongs, or outside of literary texts
   generally (religion, medicine, philosophy, or other arts or sciences)
 * Context here is considered perspectival, it can include the reading act and
   act of reception, genre, systems of signs in other contexts, key is that
   comparative lit. tries to stress both the reason for comparison (analogy)
   and its potential fruitfulness (difference).  The comparison is always
   guided by a specific angle (tertium comparationis) that may shift as new
   contexts are discovered
 * Contexts are only comparative, if they stress both analogy and distance
   (difference, foreignness).  Contextualization is not just a list of contexts
   under certain headings, it produces a text corpus of a higher order (a
   network)  (TEXT | CONTEXTS | TEXT could be the central side-by-side
   interface for RPPA? p. 46 Hoffmann) But contexts also create a web of
   references that illuminate not only the texts that are being compared, but
   also widen the reference/text correlation, contexts interplay with each
   other as well as the texts.  Contexts is intentionally and essentially
   plural.
 * It seems that the TEI Linking, Segmentation, and Alignment mechanisms might
   be able to encode individual occurrences between two texts, which could then
   be visualized across the texts (need to give every text IDs for words,
   lines, line groups, paragraphs, titles, etc.)
 * the general lit. part of comparative lit. is intended as a synthesis of
   communalities, tendencies, similarities and analogies (e.g. European
   Romantic poetry), while the comparative part is intended to be analytical,
   based on concrete examples (close r.), highlights differences and
   particularities
 * comparative lit. does not start from or have a concept of a practitioner
   having his own literary background: a germanist comparing Goethe to Byron is
   not a comparatist.  The comparatist is supranational, his tools and concepts
   are based on a view of a multinational unity of literatures.
 * In addition, comparative lit. is transdisciplinary and intermedial,
   transcending literature, and embracing the wider cultural production
   generally, comparatist contexts are always foreign, it is what makes
   comparisons fruitful and keeps the subject new and interesting
 * Comparison happens on different textual layers where a tertium comparationis
   can be identified (e.g. contents [topic, motifs, places, people, concepts],
   textual organisation [description, poetic form, register, speakers,
   discourse], historical context [influences, period, other arts, science,
   genre]), but it also embraces productive otherness and foreignness
 * /Influence/ is a key term in comparative lit., it has an /emitter/ and
   /receiver/ and is always between different languages, other terms include
   /effect/ and /reception/ (influence used to be a strict category of proven
   instances of influence, today it embraces a much wider spectrum of
   similarities) --- Influence and proof of it used to be the classic but now
   outdated undertaking of comp. lit.  Similarities offer more wide-ranging,
   conceptual insights than derivation from something, but vagueness and
   over-determination must be avoided.
 * Another key term is /topic/ expressed through a text, which draws on
   /motifs/ taken from a set of extra-literary /plots/ (multi-lingual
   topic-modelling), the emergence and formation of /topics/ in texts is
   crucial not an enumeration, it needs to draw on the cultural connotations
   as well as reader expectations and reception
 * /Genre/ in its formation in the literatures of the world is another key area
   of comp. lit. studies
 * Translation is a key component, all translation is an act of interpretation,
   as is any reading, requires comparative investigation in itself, translation
   is no longer an issue for comparatists, with an ever expanding universe of
   "world" literature it has become standard rather than the exception
 * Imagology (study of foreignness) is at the heart of a culturally expanded
   understanding of comp. lit. studies.  The reception and transmission of
   accounts of foreignness are as important as the foreign nature itself,
   whether this is real or only perceived.  As a text-critical approach,
   imagology identifies the means and functions of the image of the "foreign"
   in a text, their transmission and reception, comparatists compare and
   contrast
 * In relation to the "other arts", stylistic, thematic, formal, motival
   similarities abound; it is best to consider the arts as a unity, which is
   historically correct; there may be references in texts that hint at
   relations with other arts, e.g. ballad/song, picturesque.  Poetry and music
   can be connected in a multitude of ways, combining phonetic and semantic
   layers; such relations can always ultimately lead to transformations and
   reinterpretations of the original in the receiving art form
 * comparative arts investigate individual occurrences as well as trends in the
   languages of the arts generally
 * transliterary connections are those to the sciences, politics, economics,
   etc.
 * the dream of comparatists to be in no place -- and hence in every place --
   requires collaboration, networks of practitioners and convergence of
   approaches
 * On the textual level, the omparative endeavour is called "intertextuality",
   on the critical level it is called "comparative literary studies" (lit.
   theory, cult. studies, postcolonialism, world lit., translation studies,
   reception studies)
 * Comp. lit. can be pursued through its topics or its methods: 1. topics:
   tracing motifs, offers a structure for comparisons, and provides helpful
   hooks for wider cultural memory and tradition, provides insights into how
   periods and places think and contribute to cultural history; 2. methods:
   this approach views texts under a guiding principle like Feminism or
   Marxism, but caution is required not to let the guiding principle determine
   what is read.
 * Periods and regions (historical and geographical approaches) are most
   commonly examined in comp. lit. today.  Modern comp. lit. historizises and
   contextualizes (it looks back in time and sideways across cultures), the
   idea of walking in Romanticism (from Rousseau to Goethe, from Wordsworth to
   Leopardi) --- the historical approach necessitates a geographical component
   in as much as it implies a number of different contexts within a particular
   period from different literatures
 * any number of national and international factors must be taken into account
   to contextualize a period's self-understanding.
 * "To do full justice to Romanticism as a periodic category [...], one must
   _de facto_ be a comparatist, since its major works in France and Italy do
   not appear until the 1820s and 1830s---a full generation after its first
   flowering in England and Germany---and so in part constitute responses to
   the English and German precedents." [Hutchinson, _Comp. Lit._ 22.]
 * Comp. lit. not only sets lit. periods against each other (as ordinary
   periodization does), but also against alternative versions of each other as
   they manifest themselves in different national traditions. Comp. lit. always
   combines historical and national traditions. Cultural differences and
   meta-geographical categories are necessarily picked apart before reassembled
   by the comparatist under a new light
 * Traditional comp. -> close reading of texts from different literatures in
   their original languages to draw out similarities and differences in great
   detail to illuminate cross-cultural composite sense from the comparison
 * Today -> different comp. lit., no more authority of the author or work
   (which allows for comparison only when direct influence can be affirmed),
   cross-searchability of vast text archives, "distant" reading texts in
   translation, all have changed the way we read, ever expanding notions of
   "world" literature have made the ideal of working in original language less
   imperative, translation is now an accepted necessity, it foregrounds the
   critic's inevitable distance (historically, geographically, linguisticallly)
   from the object of study
 * "Distant" reading, i.e. reading through translations alone is now
   permissible and makes possible large-scale studies (such as RPPA!) of
   literature (by a single scholar) for the first time
 * "Distant" reading computational comparatists need proficiency in use of
   databases and statistical analysis to look beyond the artistic aspects to
   the expression of broader literary and cultural trends, mapping it onto the
   evolution of forms, genres, and ideas/motifs
 * There is a danger of flattening out local differences by imposing universal
   perceptions while applying a comp. perspective on the canon
 * Genre and style in comp. lit. is not uniform, different traditions have
   different generic and stylistic conventions, these invite us to consider
   both formal and historical conceptions of the role of literature in each
   tradition.  Generalisations are such necessary to stake out one's area of
   study (Romanticism), but must also be questioned.
 * Intertextuality has replaced influence as the predominant metaphor as it
   highlights not only the relationship of one work to another but also the
   ways in which we make sense of this relationship through pre-existing
   frameworks. Meaning itself is to be found in the spaces "between" texts.
 * Comp. lit. is situated between languages, lit. criticism, and cultural
   studies, it is defined by its porous relationship to neighbouring
   disciplines and reflects the changes and interests in lit. studies generally
 * Translation is the bread and butter of even the most polyglott of
   comparatists, it is not a dirty secret, necessary evil, inferior imitation,
   unavoidable problem or issue. It is important to stress the positive,
   instead of endlessly dwelling on the negative: translation is the closest
   form of reading, and as a model for comparative lit., it functions both as
   condition and criticism of how we read.  Translation understood properly is
   a culturally specific process.  It is a precondition of as well as the
   process of international communication.
 * Translation not only makes comparison possible, it is itself an act of
   comparison
 * Translation studies have shifted attention from the more straightforward
   claims of equivalence towards subtler forms of exchange.
 * Translation remains both the prerequisite for and the very practice of comp.
   lit.
 * Translation ferries meaning between languages (horizontal axis), reception
   history traces meaning through languages (vertical axis). Reception studies
   of any kind are inherently interdisciplinary and, comparatively speaking,
   reception is a form of comparison just as comparison is a form of reception.
 * Comp. lit. is everywhere, it is not about whether but how to compare, comp.
   lit. is marginal because it chooses not to belong to any single tradition,
   and central, because it can draw on any aspect of culture, i.e.
   transdisciplinary or transnational
 * Multilingualism is a way to get out of the risk of national prejudices, we
   don't compare national and foreign, we compare literature in different
   languages.  The original egalitarian disinterested version of comparison is
   its true potential
 * Think of DH as a form of comp. lit., reading the literatures of the world
   digitally
 * Comp. lit. is about understanding how literary cultures interact
 * Contexts include intratextual (forward- and backward-looking), national,
   reception, intermedial, interdiscoursive, situational, and in a bigger
   picture literature, literary history, and world literature

Romanticism fundamentals (Ferber):
 * Romanticism as a movement has found expression in many cultural domains and
   is therefore inherently multi-dimensional (languages, cultures, forms,
   styles, etc.), which lends itself to comparatist investigation.
 * Romanticism refers to a period of time and a set of distinctive beliefs,
   sentiments, norms, and themes. "Romantic period poetry" seems to
   appropriately define the earliest manifestations of Romanticism in the late
   18th century to the mid-19th centuries.
 * Augustan -> Sensibility -> Romantic (different labels in Europe)
 * emotional education / gothic / ballad / medieval (Ossian)
 * Old view of Romanticism: reaction against Enlightenment rationalism
 * New view: R. is an episode within the larger movement of Sensibility; R. has
   its roots in the aftermath of the French Revolution, social and political
   reform, seeking effective benevolence through renovation of government,
   religion, and education (p.31)
 * The cultivation of the self and society as a whole is a prerequisite for
   such reform, and art (poetry above all) was a vehicle towards that aim
 * The poet is therefore in a uniquely privileged position to bring about this
   change, but already in the R. age, the poet is unappreciated and overlooked
   and R. laments this tragedy
 * The R. poetic image as the outcast genius, the consecrated soul, the prophet
   without honour are still with us today
 * Dominant images of the poet: consecrated; soaring; dying; suffering;
   outcast; alienated;
 * Most R. spoke 2 or 3 languages and read several more, hugely important for
   experience of contemporariness among R.s
 * Poets needed publicity post-patronage/subscriptions and part of the
   outrageous claims were just that with a larger and potent book-buying public
 * Practically every longer work by Schiller, Scott, Byron, Hugo, and Pushkin
   was turned into an opera, or several operas (p.52)
 * The outcast poet was still albe to live the life many had lost but yearned
   for
 * Also the term "poetry" was applied much wider than in its only 18th c.
   professionalized meaning. Great works of art, prose, history, etc. could be
   called poetry, e.g. paintings or music. In its original Greek sense 'poiein'
   means 'to make': "Poetry is Art itself" (p.54) -> tag line for RPPA!
 * Even God is a poet, nature is his poem. For the R. God was immanent rather
   than transcendent, which explains the close association between creator God
   and creator Poet.
 * Imagination is the greatest of human faculties and through it God-like
   vision and creative power are obtained.  Imagination is a mediating and
   unifying power of the mind, it unites the other faculties of the mind and
   unites the mind with nature itself.  It is creative and poetic: imagination,
   as opposed to fancy (which superficially aggregates given perceptions)
   produces something new, it shapes things into one.
 * The feelings themselves are not unique to the poet, everybody can experience
   nature and God's presence in it and feel at one with nature, God, and the
   poets.
 * Identification with the poets lays the foundation for the 'democratic
   poetry' of Whitman later on.
 * Women poets identified more with the fate of Sappho than their male
   counterparts' eagles, for male poets who had enjoyed fame the gesture
   towards Sappho highlighted love's superiority over fame, for women Sappho
   was also a warning and call to embrace the love and devotion to her husband.
   But to repress poetic genius is to repress Romanticism and it is
   questionable if/how many women poets of the time could really be Romantic
   poets. The R. poet was male and only as such he was able to embody the
   transgressive essence of R.
 * The R.s remove God from the transcendental throne (on which he forms a
   triangle with man and nature), religion is in feeling, not in a doctrine of
   faith; the line is now just horizontal between soul and nature. However,
   some R. maintained that nature was God's creation, rather than God was in
   Nature. Holiness is possible in purity of feeling and any good and pure soul
   can strive to achieve a God-like existence (Jesus symbolizes that man can
   achieve and embody God on earth)
 * A common trait seems to be a sense of loss on Earth through the banishment
   of the Gods through Christianity and science (p.71). The R. longs to reunite
   with this Age of the Gods' presence in his strive away from the ugliness
   and guilt of the world.
 * After the removal of God as the ultimate sublime power, the sublime is
   re-discovered in nature. Sublime nature calls forth the sublime in our soul.
   The sublime can have a mind and a voice and can be addressed. The sublime as
   distant terror features also in art and music.
 * The Bible is considered as artistic expression by Hebrews, not as living
   history, it is literature and as such influential like any big mythology.
   Equally church and liturgy are considered art from which religious
   inspiration could be drawn, a nostalgia for the age of belief. A religion of
   art was sometimes cultivated in the salons of famous aristocrats and later
   in circles organised by the artists themselves.
 * Conversions to the Catholic faith are not uncommon among R.s even if the
   conversion  is to the inspiration rather than the doctrine.
 * R. acknowledged the ideas of the Enlightenment philosophers, but rejected
   empiricism for idealism. R. were drawn to Kant's transcendental idealism,
   a unity of harmony between the external world and the mind.
 * The R. disliked Kant's subjectivism, to them nature was the primary force,
   and human consciousness is nature's product, not its creator. For most R.
   the Universe was not the externalization of the soul, but reversely the soul
   is the internalization of the Universe.
 * Nature is an organism, forming a great complex and dynamic unity, and this
   unity guarantees the objectivity of our perceptions, the harmony of subject
   and object. For R. philosopher Schelling nature really was an organism and
   it achieved self-consciousness through us.  To see nature as lifeless,
   finite, a mere set of things and events, as the British empiricists did, is
   to see it with dead eyes, indeed the true fall of humanity is the loss of
   our imaginative power, the vital vision that married us to nature.  Our
   sinfulness is a separation from it. To see nature as dead, we must be dead
   ourselves.
 * Spinoza's monoism, which equates God and Nature became extremely
   influential, his God reveals himself in Nature and doesn't transcend it and
   should not be worshipped but contemplated.  Pantheism got attached to his
   philosophy which was an expression of the R.s' religious feelings for nature
 * R.s were constantly striving for unity between subject and object, feeling
   and knowledge, fact and value, truth and beauty.  R.s typically saw the
   three domains religion, philosophy, and science as one.  Most R.s embraced
   the Enlightenment, but sought a new synthesis whereby faith, science, and
   reason would be different faces of the same universe and that all of them
   would express the cultivation, or Bildung, of the human spirit. 'Romanticism
   was the revolutionary reawakening of the Enlightenment' (Marshall Brown) and
   most R.s took a keen interest in the sciences, particular of the less
   Newtonian mechanical view of the universe. Scientific discoveries/topics
   and natural phenomena feature in many R. poems. R.s believed to have a
   living bond with nature and that in certain heightened states of mind they
   could understand the language of nature. Science's engagement with ecology
   and a living earth is "Romantic" in nature.
 * Social/political ideas: most R.s were passionately committed to political
   causes and participated in political strives, or even wars, some became
   politicians, others soldiers or revolutionaries. The successful struggle
   for independence of the American colonies was still fresh in the first R.s'
   minds, however, it was the cataclysm of the French Revolution (FR) which
   captured and permanently transformed Europe and the world.
  * The series of political earthquakes of the FR led to passionate debates and
   deeds, the revolution seemed sublime at times, both beautiful and
   terrifying, like a force of nature too great to be comprehended.  Most R.
   supported the FR enthusiastically, but by the end of the 1790s many had
   grown disillusioned by the betrayal of its original promises. Again it was
   Bildung as an ideal that ensured a sustained commitment to fight injustice,
   corruption, and envision a good society.  Second and later generation R.s
   appeared less demoralized by the FR's failure, change for the better was
   embraced and conflicts were resolved. The FR certainly displaced R. in
   France, and despite some R. writing throughout the period, it really only
   took off in the 1820s. Only England and Germany had a Romanticism nascent
   from 1770s.  And only England and Russia remained largely politically stable
   throughout the period. Repeated uprisings throughout Europe climaxing in
   1848 changed traditional assumptions about government, society and the order
   of things forever.
 * The Industrial Revolution was much more gradual, but had an equally profound
   consequence, it fostered a disdain for capitalist practices and
   commercialization, for the doctrine of utilitarianism and for urbanization.
   The dangerous effects of ruining our kinship with nature reechoed a much
   earlier tradition of town vs. country we find throughout the 18th century.
   The age's focus on 'interest' and 'improvement', 'use' and 'utility'
   conflicted heavily with R. ideas of striving to be in unity with nature and
   living a purposeful life.
 * Industry and utility are set against idleness and beauty and pleasure. The
   R.s looked everywhere for models of living uncorrupted by capitalism and the
   ever more powerful bourgeoisie: those models included the guilds of the
   Middle Ages, the cities of Ancient Greece, the tribes of Noble savages in
   America and Tahiti, the clans of Scotland, even the mysterious gypsies. Some
   turned to church for a sense of community, communion and beauty.
 * Selfless love, brotherhood and community are the ideals of society and life.
   Nation in this sense was a worthy struggle and liberation and patriotism of
   the common people inspired the literate classes in every country of Europe.
 * Above all, it was a cultural revolution that urged nations to connect to
   their own past, culture, folklore, and customs to bring about nation, unity,
   and identity. This urge sparked a serious and widespread interest in history
   and history-writing, a key characteristic of the era. Many poets turned to
   history writing and everything was re-examined from a historical point of
   view. An interest in historical linguistics, dictionaries was palpable, and
   the historical novel was invented and frequently made into operas. The
   writing of histories coincided with the rise in nationalism and re-discovery
   of national epics and folk songs. Walter Scott was collecting 'border'
   ballads and collecting national treasures became a Europe-wide effort.
   Gothic architecture, often in ruins, gained new appreciation.  National
   tendencies in Germany and Italy were rife with rhetoric of rejuvenation and
   mythology. Nationalism rose across Europe and R. thinkers and poets
   encouraged a vision of community and slow organic growth of the 'nation',
   however R. was celebrating cultural renascence rather than superiority or
   conflict, every nation was to be celebrated as a unique contribution to the
   diversity of human thinking and art.
 * R. was an internationalist movement, it involved exile and travel as
   tourists, many R.s spoke more than one and could read several languages,
   with French the common tongue. R.s considered translations to be a vital
   part of their literary labours, Byron and Mde de Stael were emblems of the
   cosmopolitanism of Romanticism.
 * From 1792 to 1815 Europe was almost continually  at war, Napoleon was the
   larger than life hero/villan of Europe. As the war raged on, sentiments
   turned against the Revolution and for the war against Napoleon.
 * Women's liberation was not on the forefront of R.; partly due to the war,
   it remasculined lit. culture. Though R. values and beliefs attracted both
   men and women, it was much harder for women, especially if they had
   children or lacked wealth.  Europe was only just beginning here and there
   to loosen its patriarchal order.
 * Romanticism yearned for other places, other times, other cultures, almost
   anything other than the increasingly tedious, regimented, soulless, worldly
   life of modernizing Europe. Travel in thought and body was popular, a fav.
   destination was the 'orient' loosely defined.  It was attractive due to its
   colourfulness, former grandeur, air of mystery and seclusion, eroticism,
   rare goods, primitive loyalties, climate etc. But also repellant due to its
   depotism, fanatical religion, cruelty, mistreatment of women, its effeminate
   languor, and its mythology as a sleeping tiger.  Fragmentariness was
   conducive to tales of the East, much mythologizing of Eastern customs has
   taken place in most. Painters and musicians both embraced the 'Oriental'
   worlds imagined by R. writers. Gypsies too provided inspiration of freedom
   and simple life for R.s
 * The arts: R. is primarily an artistic movement and will be remembered as
   such long after its religious, political, philosophical ideas and feelings
   have been superseeded. Lyric poetry, music, and art all flourished during
   the R. period. _Content_ was eagerly and freely adapted in all forms of
   art, poems turned into operas, including Shakespearean plays which
   experienced a revival after neoclassical neglect. Much textless musical
   work interpreted R. literature, e.g. in overtures. Delacroix and Turner
   painted R. scenes from literature and were interested in the suffering poet
   trope (incl. Shakespeare, Milton, Tasso, Ovid), but Nature's sublimity
   featured large in many paintings: mountains, seascapes, moonlight, ruins
   reclaimed by nature. Evening and night were favourite tropes for R. artists,
   times of calmness, melancholy, and revelation
 * Form was also something that was shared, both literature and music embraced
   shorter forms (lit: lyric forms, e.g. sonnets, odes, effusions, meditations,
   elegies; music: nocturnes, overtures, improptus, preludes, fantasias, songs)
   alongside larger works. Shorter forms gained new prestige.
   Among painters, landscapes and portraits grew in prominence at the expense
   of 'history painting'. They coexisted, and many artists painted both,
   landscapes noteably grew in popularity. All R. artists experimented with
   form, sometimes merging old and new. Deliberate fragments became a lit.
   form, they engaged readers' imagination. In art, some works embraced
   sketching and coarse brushwork to a polished touch. Sketches, studies, and
   drawings were appreciated for their expressivity, vividness, and
   spontaneiety.  In music improvisations were popular and some preludes have
   a fragmentary air
 * The R.s restored music to the true sister art of poetry, replacing painting.
   Music is deemed the most Romantic art form of all. The revival of lyric
   forms in lit. attests to the rise of music's prestige.
 * These interactions amount to a system, a complicated cluster of art forms,
   R. was more than a rebellion against the neoclassical system that preceeded
   it, it was a revolution imagining an entirely new system with many,
   wide-spread recurrences in form and style as well as theme.  It was the last
   proper revolution in any of the arts.
 * The study of R. must "seek a considerably greater common ground upon which
   to see a reformulated and comparative Romanticism.[...] This new Romanticism
   needs to include not only fiction, but theater, science, a study of morals
   and economics, the pan-European periodical canon and so on."  We need a
   deeper understanding of the artistic, social, and cultural ethos of Europe
   as a whole to appreciate the need for recovery of numerous male and female
   Romantics.  It is clear that we need to encourage an expanding and
   cross-linguistic view of Romanticism, understanding (for example) the
   British version in broader terms than that of Regency culture."
   (_Comparative Romanticisms: Power, Gender, Subjectivity_, edited by Larry H.
   Peer, Diane Long Hoeveler. Columbia, SC: Camden, 1998. "A Lense for
   Comparative Romanticisms", by the editors, 4-5.)
