The Mystery of Sighs

Sighs constitute the element
 In which the Demiurge breathes. 
Look back! What did gladden your senses,
 Making your heart beat faster,
 A mild rose glow of delight
 Furtively spattering your pale cheeks? 
What was it? Only a sigh of melancholy,
 Risen from the source of the life of spirits,
 Going astray in the labyrinths of time. 

Two laws govern the life of men,
 Two forces arch over all that is born
 Beneath the awkward disc of the moon. 
Listen, human! The power to desire
 Is the first one. The compulsion to resign
 The second one. Separated in heaven,
 These laws are one and the same
 In the countries where Achamot rules,
 And as eternal unity and duality
 They appear in the mystery of sighs. 
Between Life’s sigh of sorrow and Death’s
 The human heart falters here on earth,
 And each single breath teaches
 Its mission in the world of senses. 

Do you see the ocean? With haste it comes,
 Wanting to clutch with blue longful arms
 Beneath the wedding torches of the firmament
 To its breast the earth, covered with lilies. 
Lo! It comes. How its heart heaves
 High with longing! How its arms strive! 
But in vain. No wish is fulfilled
 Beneath the moon. Even the moon’s fullness
 Is momentaneous. Deceived by longing
 The ocean recedes and its noble billows
 Go back sighing from the shore. 

Do you hear the wind? Soughing he soars
 Amidst the high poplar heads of the grove. 
Hark! Crescending his sighs do speak,
 As if yearning for a body of his own,
 To let him wed the Flora of summer. 
But already the voices wane. On the Aeolic
 Harp of the leaves the swan song plays
 Constantly duller, and finally dies. 

What is spring? Nothing but sighs from earth’s
 Sombre bosom, to ask the King of heaven
 Whether the May of Eden shall ever begin? 
What is the lark, the darling of the morning beam? 
The nightingale, the confident of shadows? 
Nothing but sighs, changeling vicissitudes. 

Human! If you wish the wisdom of life
 Then listen to me! Two laws govern
 This life. The capacity to desire
 Is the first one. The compulsion to resign
 Is the second one. Elevate to freedom
 This compulsion, and, hallowed and redeemed,
 Above the circling planets of the dust,
 Enter you shall through the gates of glory. 
