To Jarifa in an Orgy

Come, Jarifa, bring your hand, come and place it on my brow for I feel my head burn in a sea of burning lava. Come and place on my lips those lips which inflame me, where still there hover the kisses of your former lovers. What of virtue, purity! What of truth and love! The deceptive illusion of a child which flattered my youth. Give me wine: may my memories drown in it; bewildered, without feeling, let life go by and the coffin bring me peace. Sweat burns my face and my eyes shine uncertainly, red with flaming blood, my heart leaps. Be off, woman; I hate you, I feel your hand in mine and I feel it cold, and your kisses are like ice. Always the same! Stupid women, invent other caresses, another world, other delights, or cursed be pleasure! Your kisses are deceitful, a lie your tenderness, your beauty ugliness, your enjoyment suffering. I desire love, I desire glory, one not of this world; and it is the light of that star which deceived my imagination, a false flame, a false guide which carried me off, errant and blind. Why did my soul die to pleasure and yet lives for impious pain? Why, if I lie in indolent calm, instead of peace I feel arid loathing? Why this disquieting and burning desire? Why this strange and vague feeling that I myself realise is a delirium and yet I seek its seductive allure? Why do I still imagine loves and pleasures which I feel certain will be falsehood? Why, perhaps, does my foolish heart long after fantastic women if, afterwards, in place of meadows and flowers, it finds arid deserts and thorns, and in stupid and lubricious love affairs will only find disgust and vexation? I threw myself, like a fleeting comet, on the wings of my burning imagination; wherever my impetuous and unquiet mind flew I thought I would find happiness and triumph. I threw myself in a daring flight beyond the world in the ethereal regions and I found doubt, and the radiant heavens I saw converted into an airy illusion. Later, on earth, I sought virtue, glory with anxiety and a delirious passion, and I found nauseous dust and insubstantial dross. I saw women of virginal purity among pure white clouds of celestial light; I touched them and saw their purity change into smoke and mire and corruption. And I found my illusions dissolved and eternal and insatiable my desire, I touched reality and hated life; I only believe in the peace of the grave. Yet I seek and greedily seek and my soul still imagines and desiresdelights; I question, and a fearful accent ‘Alas!’, replies, ‘despair and die. Die unhappy man: life is a torment, pleasure a deceit; there is no peace on earth for thee, nor happiness, nor contentment, only eternal ambition and eternal struggle. For thus God punishes the daring soul who madly aspires in his insane delirium to discover the unfathomable secret mysteries of truth kept hidden from mortals.’ Oh!, cease; no, I wish to see no more, nor know nothing; my soul satiated and prostrate longs only to rest. Feeling has died in me, for my happiness is already dead; neither pleasure nor sadness return to trouble my breast. Pass by, pass by in an illusory distorting glass and deceive other young spirits; pearly images of glory, crowned with gold and laurel, pass by. Pass by, pass by in confusion, voluptuous women, with dance and clamour; pass by like vaporous visions without moving or wounding my heart. And let the toasts and the din of the feast befuddle my confused imagination, and let night fly by and let day surprise me in a stupid and endless lethargy. Come, Jarifa, you, like me, have suffered; you never weep. Yet, o sadness!, you know how bitter is my affliction. We are one in our pain; in vain you hold back your weeping ... You, too, like me, bear a heart that is rent in pieces.
