Epistles

[‘Epistle I’ (excerpt)]

When, at night, with drooping eyelids, I blow out the candle’s flare,
 Time’s unending path is followed only by the old clock there;
 For just draw aside the curtain and the moon will flood the room
 With a fire of passion summoned by the ardours of her gloom;
 From the night of recollection she will resurrect an eon
 Of distress – which we, however, sense as in a dream-like paean. 

Moon, arch-mistress of the ocean, you glide o’er the planet’s sphere,
 You give light in thoughts unthought-of and eclipse sorrow and fear;
 Oh, how many deserts glimmer under your soft virgin light
 And how many woods o’ershadow brooks and rivers burning bright! 
There are many waves which you dispose of as you please,
 When you sail upon the ever restless solitude of seas;

Of resplendent climes, or gardens, palaces and castles old,
 Which you impregnate with magic and to your own view unfold;
 Of the dwellings that you enter tiptoe by the window-pane
 To gaze thoughtfully at foreheads that so many thoughts enchain! 
A king’s plans enmesh the planet for a century or more,
 While the pauper hardly thinks of what his morrow has in store. 
Though Fate has allotted them different rungs and ways,
 Both submit alike to Death’s beckoning rays. 

While the moon shines over mouldy books penned by sages,
 His thoughts take him back through the bygone ages
 To the very first, when being and non-being were nought still,
 When there was utter absence of both life-impulse and will,
 When nothing was unopened, although everything was hidden,
 When, by His own self pervaded, resting lay the All-forbidden. 
Was it an abyss? a chasm? wat’ry plains without an end? 
There was no estate of wisdom, nor a mind to comprehend. 
For the darkness was steel-solid just like the shadows’ ocean,
 And there were no eyes at all to form of it a notion. 
Of the unmade things the shadows had not yet begun to gleam
 And, with its own self contented, peace eternal reigned supreme. 
Suddenly, a dot starts moving – the primeval, lonely Other ... 
It becomes the Father potent, while the void becomes the mother. 
Weaker than a drop of water, this small dot that moves and bounds
 Is the unrestricted ruler of the world’s unbounded bounds. 
Ever since the vasty dimness has been splitting slice by slice,
 Ever since come into being earth, sun, moon, light, heat and ice. 
Ever since up to the present galaxies of planets lost
 Follow up mysterious courses, chaos-bred and chaos-tossed,
 And in endlessness begotten, endless swarms of light and thronging
 Towards life, forever driven by an infinity of longing;
 And in this great world, we, children of a world grotesquely small,
 Raise upon our tiny planet anthills to o’ertop the All.
 Lilliputian kings and peoples, soldiers, both unread and erudite,
 We engender generations, reckoning ourselves full bright! 
One-day moths upon a mudball measurable with the chip,
 We rotate in the great vastness and forget ‘twixt cup and lip
 That this world is really nothing but a moment caught in light,
 That behind, or else before it, all that one can see is night. 
Just like whirls of dust and powder thousands of live granules play
 In the glorious beam’s brilliance and then vanish with the ray. 
Thus against the never-failing night of time without a bound,
 The spontaneous ray, the moment, still fails not to go the round;
 When it dies, all dies – like shadows melting in the murky distance
 For the universe chimeric is a dream of non-existence. 

Among walls, and trees, and blossoms that are falling white and tender,
 How the full moon spreads her own calm and radiant splendour! 
From the night of recollection myriads of longings beam
 And their pain is mitigated, we feel them as in a dream. 
She opens wide the entrance to our inner world of doubt,
 Conjuring a host of shadows when the candlelight is out. 
Oh, how many deserts glimmer under your soft virgin light,
 And how many woods o’ershadow brooks and rivers bright! 
How many waves you dispose of as you please,
 When you sail over the ever restless solitude of seas;
 And all those who in their lifetime are subjected to Fate’s ways
 Both submit alike to Death’s beckoning rays! 
