To My Friend V. H.

Do you hear that long soft sound like a harmony,
That cry that, after too long a struggle,
Genius wrests from the world,
That cry suddenly arising from the mute crowd,
And carrying to glory the name of a great poet —
Noble friend, have you heard?

In this world where the sons of Eve narrowly creep,
While you, your eye upon the sky, are carried upward
By your sovereign flight,
While your wing toys with the flanks of black clouds
And fights with lightning bolts, or while you float at ease
Serenely in the light;

Extending your sublime range and hovering, alone,
Between the voices from above and the echo of the earth,
Young conqueror tell,
O tell me, do you hear us? Is the solemn clamor
Swelling with pride your wing in the cloud
And moving your soul?

Or else, hearing nothing of this empty, passing noise,
Filled with divine chords, your glance fixed on a sun
In the infinite deep,
Do you plunge, to attain it, into waves of light.
And soon, when you rest there, do you then allow
Your eyes to close in sleep?

And I, I hear it well, this world that admires you.
Mighty shout! How it delights me, friend, and tortures me '
How kind it is and cruel!
For me, awakened from sweet dreams, the holy eagle
Is a gnawing vulture that takes me not to heaven —
Me, poor fallen fool!

As on an autumn morning we see the swallows
Flocking together, faithful to their meeting place,
Sounding the call to go;
In the fields, on an old wall, near some chapel,
They gather, and the voice of the first ones call out
To those who are too slow.

For indeed, not far from there, a thoughtless young one,
While grazing the ground with his heavy wing
In birdlime is trapped:
Captive, he hears them all: in raucous council
They speak of traveling, their departure is set,
And their course is mapped.

They take off; Oh misery! Farewell, flowery shore,
Farewell, springtime in that other homeland, lovely
When our winters rage!
He must remain and live out sorrow’s season,
The pitiless child that strikes him and caresses,
And the iron cage.

That is my emblem, friend, ... but if, like a good brother,
From your splendid heart you would feel compassion
For my contrary fate;
If you read in my heart what I cannot read there,
And if your friendship divines in my lyre
What it cannot state;

It is enough, it is enough: Until that hour
When my soul sloughs off its mire and relights its flame
In the tombs’ deep night,
And I come, the last and one of the least worthy,
To rejoin you, amidst the eagles and the swans,
You, one of the most bright!
