It’s an Absurd World

[Canto II, ‘To Teresa. Rest in Peace’ (extract)]

Why do sad memories of lost pleasure return to my memory, to increase the anxiety and agony of this deserted and wounded heart? Alas! Of all those hours of happiness to the heart there only remains a groan and the lamentation of which the eyes deny the pain, the tears of bitterness which overwhelm the soul. Whence did they fly, alas, those hours of youth, of love and happiness, showered with sonorous music, adorned with light and beauty? Images of rippling gold, their wings of carmine and pure snow unfurling at the sun of my hopes passed by, alas, singing about me. The sweet nightingales warbled, the sun illumined my happiness, an aura sighed between the flowers, the wood gently replied, fountains murmured their loves ... Illusions which my soul laments! Oh! How sweetly the bustle and noise of the world resounded in my ear! My life, then, like a ship-of-war that leaves port for the first time and which, at the breath of the soft zephyrs, proudly unfurls its pennant and, letting the seas at its keel praise its triumph in hoarse songs, goes, sails aloft, humbling and dividing as conqueror, wave after roaring wave; alas!, I flew on the sea of the world with a burning anxiety for love. I bore the morning sun on my unlined brow and my pure soul was exultant with my happiness. In my mind, love, like a rich fountain which trickles between greenness and groves, bubbled up then into an abundant river of illusions and sweet delirium. I loved everything: a noble sentiment exalted my spirit and I felt in my breast a sacred movement, a generous guide to great deeds. Liberty with its immortal breath, holy goddess, lit up my soul, constantly imagining in my pure faith, dreams of worldly glory and of good fortune. [...] I, exiled on a stranger’s shore, with ecstatic eyes I followed the audacious bark which on a silvery ray of light flew from the harbour of my homeland. When the sun swooned in the West, alone and lost amid the darkening masts, I thought I heard the harmonious accent of a woman across the sigh of the wind. A woman! She grows in colour in the warm beams of the magical moon; she slowly fades away, far off between the clouds at the languid swoon of the setting sun; she shimmers for a second at the break of day on the hilltops which May garlands with flowers; she walks through the dark glade and plays in the waters of the serene river. [...] A woman which love fashions to her illusions, a woman who says nothing to the senses, a dream of the sweetest tenderness, an echo which brings pleasure to our ears, the generous and pure flame of love, the sweet delights of fulfilled pleasure which garlands a rich fantasy, pleasures for which the heart avariciously longs. Alas! That woman, only she can hope to gain so much delirious delight and yet that woman so pure and beautiful is the deceitful illusion of my hopes. [...] Who would have thought that a day would come when, celestial enchantment lost and the blindfold fallen from the eyes, all that had given delight would give vexation? [...] For thus the rapid hours passed by and, at the same pace, our happinesspassed away, and never did we count our anxieties; you intoxicated in my love, I in your beauty. The hours, alas!, fleeting by, observed us. [...] And the hour finally came. Oh! Who, impiously, alas!, seared the flower of your purity? You were once a crystalline river, a spring of limpid purity; afterwards a torrent of dark colours breaking out between gorges and wild plants; in the end a bog of corrupted waters held back by foetid mud. How did you fall down, thrown from on high to the earth, star of the luminous morning?
