Thoughts in the Library

Consider, scholar, when you enter here,
 on cast-off rags, man’s stigma freshly marked,
 with words as stark as the dark winter night,
 there looms, written blood-black, the awesome lesson:
 ‘While into misery millions are born
 a few thousand might find in life salvation
 could they but make use of the days of their lives,
 had they the mind divine, the Seraph’s temper.’ 
Why all this rubbish? So, like sheep on grass
 we may graze on it? Sated with fodder
 and idle hours synthesized by science amoral
 to waste God’s day, a nation’s energy? 
Why this rubbish? From its stench I recall
 all the sins of the animal man – they reek! 
Virtue is written on this page, which once
 as rag has garbed an outlaw. This other page?
 perhaps – oh happy days of innocence –
 the frail dress ripped from a ravished virgin,
 perhaps a lust-enraged whore’s negligee. 
And here on these leaves, the law whitewashed from
 remnants of bloody rebels and false judges,
 from masks of sanguine tyrants washed white;
 the secrets of machines and of numbers laid bare,
 but those who tore garments, stripped man naked,
 flayed dignity that bindings might be vellum,
 these, unaccounted for, must render account –
 they spin on Ixion’s tempest-driven wheel
 within the vortex, misery without end
 and, gnashing their teeth, wail in the dark outside. 
On the madman’s sheets ponders a sage’s head;
 the astronomer, on eyeless beggar’s rags
 measures bursting universes piled on end –
 light and blindness, all on a flimsy page! 
The coward and the captive, both hapless roles
 are bound forever in one book that sings
 of freedom and heroes hewing history ... 
Stainless sheets, pulped from traitor’s rags, now
 reward the friend and thus honour the faithful;
 yet over all, all-polluting, the Big Lie! 
The Word, cursed by the pallid winding sheet
 its black image adorns, suffers damnation. 
Rag-lure of countries, your name is library! 
Where, then, is the volume that answers all? 
The greater part of Man – where is his joy? 
Is the world no better for any book? 
Yes! The more gloriously man’s societies arise
 the greater the human refuse at the bottom. 
The bursting breast of rags stuffed with man
 must breathe contagion into the empire’s heart. 
Should we, after all, topple what countless brains
 have wrought in the linked sunbursts of their minds? 
Void the golden knowledge rare brains have
 chopped and torn away from the mines of time? 
How many bright souls immolated themselves
 in vigil at the burning ruins of the heart
 to give purpose, strength and comfort
 to erring humans humbled by destiny? 
Those heroes of unrecognized merit
 whom the contemptible public mocked
 were praised after death, when praise cost but words:
 their thoughts beatified by the martyring mob! 
Should the great burn to ashes at the same stake
 with rag peddlers, numbskulls, and mildewed hearts? 
Glow in embers with dark passion-panders
 indiscriminate? Good on account of bad, with them? 
Never! That which I said was pain. 
The travail of many a bold spirit,
 even those luminous minds could not save
 the sons of dust from sinking in the mud. 
There is barely a corner of the world,
 one little oasis on the barren sand
 where the most sought-after name is not that of Man,
 where the ancient rites of generation
 yield as heritage the name of Man! 
Except for those who have been born to blackness,
 labelled cattle by the glorious elite
 who caress the dark image of God with whips. 
Despite all, despite all, one must travail –
 a new spirit is fighting its way up,
 through the soul of man bursts a new approach –
 to nurture fruitful ideals in races
 primitive, to culture finer sentiments
 that they may embrace, at last, each other,
 and within their hearts reign love and justice. 
So the lowest peasant may, in his hut,
 say with assurance: ‘I am not alone,
 my brothers and sisters number millions,
 I protect them, and me they defend;
 fate, I fear thee not, despite thy dread will!’ 
That is why one must not succumb to despair. 
Let us, steadfast as ants, set down that which
 our brains, in the rare inspired hours, create,
 and when we have assembled every stone,
 we’ll erect the Babel of a newer age,
 build it until it towers among the stars,
 and when we have looked through the gates of Heaven,
 having heard from without the Angels’ song,
 with every drop of our earthly blood
 aglow from elevated flames of delights,
 let us then scatter like the ancient peoples
 and begin anew, to endure and to learn. 
Is this then our fate, and nothing our goal? 
It is not – nor will be while the earth yields life,
 and its mortal sons are not turned to stone;
 what, in this world, is our task? To struggle,
 and to nourish the needs of the spirit;
 we are Man, son to both the earth and sky,
 our soul is the wing beating toward heaven,
 but we, instead of striving up to soar,
 would rather, dully, like some bird beneath contempt,
 eke out existence sucking mud from swamps. 
What, in this world, is our task? To struggle,
 according to our strength, for noble goals. 
Before us stands the fate of a nation –
 when we, from the irrevocable fall
 have preserved it and restored it to its heights,
 fighting under the clear beam of the spirit,
 we can say, returning to our ancestors
 in the dust: Thank you, life, for thy blessings –
 this has been great joy, yea, the Work of Men! 
