The Prelude

[‘The Glad Preamble’, Book I., ll. 1-54]

Oh, there is blessing in this gentle breeze,
 That blows from the green fields, and from the clouds,
 And from the sky; it beats against my cheek,
 And seems half-conscious of the joy it gives. 
Oh welcome messenger! Oh welcome friend! 
A captive greets thee, coming from a house
 Of bondage, from yon city’s walls set free,
 A prison where he hath been long immured. 
Now I am free, enfranchised and at large,
 May fix my habitation where I will. 
What dwelling shall receive me? In what vale
 Shall be my harbour? Underneath what grove
 Shall I take up my home, and what sweet stream
 Shall with its murmur lull me to my rest? 
The earth is all before me – with a heart
 Joyous, nor scared at its own liberty,
 I look about, and should the guide I choose
 Be nothing better than a wandering cloud
 I cannot miss my way. I breathe again;
 Trances of thought and mountings of the mind
 Come fast upon me. It is shaken off –
 As by miraculous gift ’tis shaken off –
 That burden of my own unnatural self,
 The heavy weight of many a weary day
 Not mine, and such as were not made for me. 
Long months of peace (if such bold word accord
 With any promises of human life),
 Long months of ease and undisturbed delight
 Are mine in prospect. Whither shall I turn,
 By road or pathway, or through open field,
 Or shall a twig, or any floating thing
 Upon the river, point me out my course? 
Enough that I am free, for months to come
 May dedicate myself to chosen tasks –
 May quit the tiresome sea and dwell on shore
 If not a settler on the soil, at least
 To drink wild waters, and to pluck green herbs,
 And gather fruits fresh from their native tree. 
Nay more – if I may trust myself, this hour
 Hath brought a gift that consecrates my joy;
 For I, methought, while the sweet breath of heaven
 Was blowing on my body, felt within
 A corresponding, mild, creative breeze,
 A vital breeze, which travelled gently on
 O’er things which it had made, and is become
 A tempest, a redundant energy,
 Vexing its own creation. ’Tis a power
 That does not come unrecognized, a storm
 Which, breaking up a long continued frost,
 Brings with it vernal promises, the hope
 Of active days, of dignity and thought,
 Of prowess in an honourable field,
 Pure passions, virtue, knowledge and delight,
 The holy life of music and of verse. 
