The Prelude

[‘A Mind Debarred’, Book VI., ll. 239-329]

O’er paths and fields
 In all that neighbourhood, through narrow lanes
 Of eglantine and through the shady woods,
 And o’er the Border Beacon and the waste
 Of naked pools and common crags that lay
 Exposed on the bare fell, was scattered love,
 A spirit of pleasure and youth’s golden gleam. 
Oh friend, we had not seen thee at that time,
 And yet a power is on me and a strong
 Confusion, and I seem to plant thee there! 
Far art thou wandered now in search of health
 And milder breezes – melancholy lot –
 But thou art with us, with us in the past,
 The present, with us in the times to come. 
There is no grief, no sorrow, no despair,
 No languor, no dejection, no dismay,
 No absence scarcely can there be, for those
 Who love as we do. Speed thee well! Divide
 Thy pleasure with us; thy returning strength,
 Receive it daily as a joy of ours;
 Share with us thy fresh spirits, whether gift
 Of gales Etesian or of loving thoughts. 
I too have been a wanderer – but alas,
 How different is the fate of different men
 Though twins almost in genius and in mind! 
Unknown unto each other (yea, and breathing
 As if in different elements) we were framed
 To bend at last to the same discipline,
 Predestined if two beings ever were
 To seek the same delights, and have one health,
 One happiness. Throughout this narrative,
 Else sooner ended, I have known full well
 For whom I thus record the birth and growth
 Of gentleness, simplicity, and truth,
 And joyous loves that hallow innocent days
 Of peace and self-command. Of rivers, fields,
 And groves I speak to thee, my friend – to thee
 Who, yet a liveried schoolboy in the depths
 Of the huge city, on the leaded roof
 Of that wide edifice, thy home and school,
 Wast used to lie and gaze upon the clouds
 Moving in heaven, or haply, tired of this,
 To shut thine eyes and by internal light
 See trees, and meadows, and thy native stream,
 Far distant, thus beheld from year to year
 Of thy long exile. 
Nor could I forget
 In this late portion of my argument
 That scarcely had I finally resigned
 My rights among those academic bowers
 When thou wert thither guided. From the heart
 Of London, and from the cloisters there, thou camest,
 And didst sit down in temperance and peace,
 A rigorous student. What a stormy course
 Then followed! Oh, it is a pang that calls
 For utterance to think how small a change
 Of circumstances might to thee have spared
 A world of pain, ripened ten thousand hopes
 For ever withered. 
Through this retrospect
 Of my own college life I still have had
 Thy after-sojourn in the self-same place
 Present before my eyes, have played with times
 I speak of private business of the thought)
 And accidents as children do with cards,
 Or as a man who when his house is built,
 A frame locked up in wood and stone, doth still
 In impotence of mind by his fireside
 Rebuild it to his liking. I have thought
 Of thee, thy learning, gorgeous eloquence,
 And all the strength and plumage of thy youth,
 Thy subtle speculations, toils abstruse
 Among the schoolmen, and Platonic forms
 Of wild ideal pageantry, shaped out
 From things well-matched or ill, and words for things –
 The self-created sustenance of a mind
 Debarred from Nature’s living images,
 Compelled to be a life unto itself,
 And unrelentingly possessed by thirst
 Of greatness, love, and beauty. 
Not alone,
 Ah, surely not in singleness of heart,
 Should I have seen the light of evening fade
 Upon the silent Cam, if we had met
 Even at that early time. I needs must hope,
 Must feel, must trust, that my maturer age
 And temperature less willing to be moved,
 My calmer habits and more steady voice,
 Would with an influence benign have soothed
 Or chased away the airy wretchedness
 That battened on thy youth. But thou hast trod,
 In watchful meditation thou hast trod,
 A march of glory, which does put to shame
 These vain regrets. 
