Glory.

To an exiled poet

Noble ones, favored by Memory’s daughters
Two different paths lie open before you:
One leads to happiness, one leads to glory;
Mortals, you must choose.

Your fate, O Manoel follows the common rule;
The muse enraptured you with precocious gifts;
Your days were woven of glory and misfortune,
And you pour forth tears.

You would blush, sooner blush than envy the crowd
The sterile peace their hearts are anxious for;
For them the gods made all the goods of the earth;
But the lyre is ours.

The centuries are yours, the world your homeland.
When we are no longer, our shade has altars
Where the just future prepares for your genius
Immortal honors.

So the proud eagle in its abode of thunder
Darts past, and sustaining its daring flight,
Seems to say to mortals, “I was born on earth,
But I live in the sky.”

Yes, glory awaits you; but stop, and contemplate
At what price one enters these sacred precincts;
See! Misfortune, seated at the temple gate,
Is guarding the stairs.

Here an old man whom ungrateful Ionia
Saw taking his miseries from sea to sea,
Blind, would beg as the price of his genius
Bread moistened with tears.

There Tasso, burning with a fatal flame,
Atoning in irons for his glory and love,
When about to collect his triumphal palm
Descends to the darkness.

Everywhere the unhappy, the banished, the victims,
Struggling with fate or against assassins;
One would say heaven to magnanimous hearts
Weighs more than evils.

Enjoin then to silence your lyre’s complaints:
To hearts without virtue, misfortune is danger;
But in you, dethroned king, let misery inspire
A noble disdain.

Do you care, after all, that this barbaric order
Fetters you far from the land of your cradle?
Do you care in what place fate prepares for you
A glorious tomb?

These tyrants of the Tagus with exile and irons
Cannot chain your glory to the land of your death:
Lisbon reclaims it, and that is the bequest
You will leave to it.

Those who disowned him will mourn the great man;
Athens opens its pantheon to those it banished;
Coriolanus dies, and the children of Rome
Lay claim to his name.

Before descending to the shores of the dead,
Ovid raises to heaven his suppliant hands:
To the rude Sarmatians he bequeathed his ashes,
To the Romans his glory.
