Don Juan

[Canto II, st. 188-198 (ll. 1497 – 1584).]

188

They were alone, but not alone as they
 Who shut in chambers think it loneliness;
 The silent ocean, and the starlight bay,
 The twilight glow which momently grew less,
 The voiceless sands and dropping caves, that lay
 Around them, made them to each other press,
 As if there were no life beneath the sky
 Save theirs, and that their life could never die. 

189

They fear’d no eyes nor ears on that lone beach,
 They felt no terrors from the night, they were
 All in all to each other: though their speech
 Was broken words, they thought a language there, –
 And all the burning tongues the passions teach
 Found in one sigh the best interpreter
 Of nature’s oracle – first love, – that all
 Which Eve has left her daughters since her fall. 

190

Haidde spoke not of scruples, ask’d no vows,
 Nor offer’d any; she had never heard
 Of plight and promises to be a spouse,
 Or perils by a loving maid incurr’d;
 She was all which pure ignorance allows,
 And flew to her young mate like a young bird;
 And, never having dreamt of falsehood, she
 Had not one word to say of constancy. 

191

She loved, and was beloved – she adored,
 And she was worshipp’d; after nature’s fashion,
 Their intense souls, into each other pour’d,
 If souls could die, had perish’d in that passion, –
 But by degrees their senses were restored,
 Again to be o’ercome, again to dash on;
 And, beating ’gainst his bosom, Haidee’s heart
 Felt as if never more to beat apart. 

192

Alas! they were so young, so beautiful,
 So lonely, loving, helpless, and the hour
 Was that in which the heart is always full,
 And, having o’er itself no further power,
 Prompts deeds eternity can not annul,
 But pays off moments in an endless shower
 Of hell-fire – all prepared for people giving
 Pleasure or pain to one another living. 

193

Alas! for Juan and Haidee! they were
 So loving and so lovely – till then never,
 Excepting our first parents, such a pair
 Had run the risk of being damn’d for ever;
 And Haidee, being devout as well as fair,
 Had, doubtless, heard about the Stygian river,
 And hell and purgatory – but forgot
 Just in the very crisis she should not. 

194

They look upon each other, and their eyes
 Gleam in the moonlight; and her white arm clasps
 Round Juan’s head, and his around hers lies
 Half buried in the tresses which it grasps;
 She sits upon his knee, and drinks his sighs,
 He hers, until they end in broken gasps;
 And thus they form a group that’s quite antique,
 Half naked, loving, natural, and Greek. 

195

And when those deep and burning moments pass’d,
 And Juan sunk to sleep within her arms,
 She slept not, but all tenderly, though fast,
 Sustain’d his head upon her bosom’s charms;
 And now and then her eye to heaven is cast,
 And then on the pale cheek her breast now warms,
 Pillow’d on her o’erflowing heart, which pants
 With all it granted, and with all it grants. 

196

An infant when it gazes on a light,
 A child the moment when it drains the breast,
 A devotee when soars the Host in sight,
 An Arab with a stranger for a guest,
 A sailor when the prize has struck in fight,
 A miser filling his most hoarded chest,
 Feel rapture; but not such true joy are reaping
 As they who watch o’er what they love while sleeping. 

197

For there it lies so tranquil, so beloved,
 All that it hath of life with us is living;
 So gentle, stirless, helpless, and unmoved,
 And all unconscious of the joy ’t is giving;
 All it hath felt, inflicted, pass’d, and proved,
 Hush’d into depths beyond the watcher’s diving:
 There lies the thing we love with all its errors
 And all its charms, like death without its terrors. 

198

The lady watch’d her lover – and that hour
 Of Love’s, and Night’s, and Ocean’s solitude,
 O’erflow’d her soul with their united power;
 Amidst the barren sand and rocks so rude
 She and her wave-worn love had made their bower,
 Where nought upon their passion could intrude,
 And all the stars that crowded the blue space
 Saw nothing happier than her glowing face. 
