The Song of the Slave

A miserable captive, I groan in humiliation. I cannot even breathe out sad supplications. My stern master makes my blood and tears flow for whatever reason. A curse on the wild murderer who first humiliated his equals! A curse on those mortals who believe they can control like gods! Who has given man the right to buy and sell men? Who, delivering their names to opprobrium, do not brand their foreheads with infamy? My unjust master, you beat my naked back with an iron bar and in my bitter affliction you take pleasure, deaf to my tremulous voice. Does other blood run in my veins? Am I of a different species and nature? It is the image of God, it is his creation you insult, o stern master! Alas, what a sad fate is mine! I hide my shame where I can; if they call I respond in trembling, I hear my voice expire on my lips. If they look at me, I drop my eyes and fix them, humiliated, on the ground, like the condemned man stands terrified by his crime before the judge who is about to sentence him. Nor are the sweet caresses of love given me to enjoy. O sadness! For the proud beauty could never love an unfortunate slave. Beauty does not stint her favours for the noble, the valiant, nor for the king of the stars do the flowers their essence and their tints. See the man who calls himself free, how he lifts his brow to the heavens; how his dignified sense of well-being is reflected in his manly face. Seeing him burning with anger and struggling between envy and vexation, it seems as if my downcast and servile state aggrieves his eyes. At once I hear a voice which cries: ‘You are a man, you are free, you are strong, and to he whom death brings no fears, never, never will he groan in chains. There is no one who should oppress us though he occupy the canopy of kings. There is no law that makes us slaves, God created men free!’ A volcanic flame burns in my breast; I am no longer timid, I am a lion. Tyrannical master give me liberty or I shall break, O treacherous man, your heart.

