Don Juan

[‘The Shipwreck’, Canto II, st. 51-52, 56-58, 65-83]

Canto II.

LI.

At half-past eight o’clock, booms, hencoops, spars,
 And all things, for a chance, had been cast loose
 That still could keep afloat the struggling tars –
 For yet they strove, although of no great use:
 There was no light in heaven but a few stars,
 The boats put off o’ercrowded with their crews;
 She gave a heel, and then a lurch to port,
 And, going down head foremost – sunk, in short. 

LII.

Then rose from sea to sky the wild farewell,
 Then shrieked the timid, and stood still the brave;
 Then some leaped overboard with dreadful yell,
 As eager to anticipate their grave;
 And the sea yawned around her like a hell,
 And down she sucked with her the whirling wave,
 Like one who grapples with his enemy,
 And strives to strangle him before he die. 

LVI.

Juan got into the long-boat, and there
 Contrived to help Pedrillo to a place. 
It seemed as if they had exchanged their care,
 For Juan wore the magisterial face
 Which courage gives, while poor Pedrillo’s pair
 Of eyes were crying for their owner’s case:
 Battista, though (a name called shortly ‘Tita’)
 Was lost by getting at some aqua-vita. 

LVII.

Pedro, his valet, too, he tried to save,
 But the same cause, conducive to his loss,
 Left him so drunk, he jumped into the wave
 As o’er the cutter’s edge he tried to cross,
 And so he found a wine-and-watery grave;
 They could not rescue him although so close,
 Because the sea ran higher every minute,
 And for the boat – the crew kept crowding in it. 

LVIII.

A small old spaniel, which had been Don Jóse’s
 His father’s), whom he loved, as ye may think,
 For on such things the memory reposes
 With tenderness, stood howling on the brink,
 Knowing – dogs have such intellectual noses! –
 No doubt, the vessel was about to sink,
 And Juan caught him up, and ere he stepped
 Off, threw him in, then after him he leapt. 

LXV.

’Tis said that persons living on annuities
 Are longer-lived than others – God knows why,
 Unless to plague the grantors – yet so true it is
 That some, I really think, do never die! 
Of any creditors the worst a Jew it is,
 And that’s their mode of furnishing supply:
 In my young days they lent me cash that way,
 Which I found very troublesome to pay. 

LXVI.

’Tis thus with people in an open boat,
 They live upon the love of life, and bear
 More than can be believed, or even thought,
 And stand like rocks the tempest’s wear and tear;
 And hardship still has been the sailor’s lot,
 Since Noah’s ark went cruising here and there –
 She had a curious crew as well as cargo,
 Like the first old Greek privateer, the Argo. 

LXVII.

But man is a carnivorous production
 And must have meals, at least one meal a day;
 He cannot live, like woodcocks, upon suction,
 But, like the shark and tiger, must have prey –
 Although his anatomical construction
 Bears vegetables in a grumbling way,
 Your labouring-people think beyond all question,
 Beef, veal, and mutton, better for digestion. 

LXVIII.

And thus it was with this our hapless crew,
 For on the third day there came on a calm,
 And though at first their strength it might renew
 And lying on their weariness like balm,
 Lulled them like turtles sleeping on the blue
 Of ocean), when they woke they felt a qualm
 And fell all ravenously on their provision,
 Instead of hoarding it with due precision. 

LXIX.

The consequence was easily foreseen –
 They ate up all they had, and drank their wine,
 In spite of all remonstrances, and then
 On what, in fact, next day were they to dine? 
They hoped the wind would rise, these foolish men! 
And carry them to shore – these hopes were fine,
 But as they had but one oar, and that brittle,
 It would have been more wise to save their victual! 

LXX.

The fourth day came, but not a breath of air,
 And Ocean slumbered like an unweaned child:
 The fifth day, and their boat lay floating there –
 The sea and sky were blue, and clear, and mild –
 With their one oar (I wish they had had a pair)
 What could they do? And hunger’s rage grew wild! 
So Juan’s spaniel, spite of his entreating,
 Was killed, and portioned out for present eating. 

LXXI.

On the sixth day they fed upon his hide,
 And Juan, who had still refused, because
 The creature was his father’s dog that died,
 Now feeling all the vulture in his jaws,
 With some remorse received (though first denied)
 As a great favour one of the forepaws,
 Which he divided with Pedrillo, who
 Devoured it, longing for the other too. 

LXXII.

The seventh day, and no wind – the burning sun
 Blistered and scorched, and, stagnant on the sea,
 They lay like carcasses; and hope was none,
 Save in the breeze that came not! Savagely
 They glared upon each other – all was done,
 Water, and wine, and food – and you might see
 The longings of the cannibal arise
 (Although they spoke not) in their wolfish eyes. 

LXXIII.

At length one whispered his companion, who
 Whispered another, and thus it went round,
 And then into a hoarser murmur grew
 An ominous, and wild, and desperate sound),
 And when his comrade’s thought each sufferer knew,
 ’Twas but his own, suppressed till now, he found –
 And out they spoke of lots for flesh and blood,
 And who should die to be his fellow’s food. 

LXXIV.

But ere they came to this, they that day shared
 Some leathern caps, and what remained of shoes;
 And then they looked around them, and despaired,
 And none to be the sacrifice would choose:
 At length the lots were torn up, and prepared,
 But of materials that much shock the Muse –
 Having no paper, for the want of better,
 They took by force from Juan, Julia’s letter. 

LXXV.

The lots were made, and marked, and mixed, and handed,
 In silent horror, and their distribution
 Lulled even the savage hunger which demanded,
 Like the Promethean vulture, this pollution. 
None in particular had sought or planned it,
 ’Twas Nature gnawed them to this resolution,
 By which none were permitted to be neuter –
 And the lot fell on Juan’s luckless tutor. 

LXXVI.

He but requested to be bled to death:
 The surgeon had his instruments, and bled
 Pedrillo, and so gently ebbed his breath
 You hardly could perceive when he was dead. 
He died as born, a Catholic in faith,
 Like most in the belief in which they’re bred,
 And first a little crucifix he kissed,
 And then held out his jugular and wrist. 

LXXVII.

The surgeon, as there was no other fee,
 Had his first choice of morsels for his pains;
 But being thirstiest at the moment, he
 Preferred a draught from the fast-flowing veins. 
Part was divided, part thrown in the sea,
 And such things as the entrails and the brains
 Regaled two sharks, who followed o’er the billow –
 The sailors ate the rest of poor Pedrillo. 

LXXVIII.

The sailors ate him, all save three or four
 Who were not quite so fond of animal food;
 To these was added Juan who, before,
 Refusing his own spaniel, hardly could
 Feel now his appetite increased much more –
 ’Twas not to be expected that he should,
 Even in extremity of their disaster,
 Dine with them on his pastor and his master. 

LXXIX.

’Twas better that he did not; for, in fact,
 The consequence was awful in the extreme:
 For they, who were most ravenous in the act,
 Went raging mad. Lord! how they did blaspheme,
 And foam and roll, with strange convulsions racked,
 Drinking salt-water like a mountain-stream,
 Tearing, and grinning, howling, screeching, swearing,
 And, with hyaena-laughter, died despairing. 

LXXX.

Their numbers were much thinned by this infliction,
 And all the rest were thin enough, Heaven knows;
 And some of them had lost their recollection,
 Happier than they who still perceived their woes;
 But others pondered on a new dissection,
 As if not warned sufficiently by those
 Who had already perished, suffering madly,
 For having used their appetites so sadly. 

LXXXI.

And next they thought upon the master’s mate,
 As fattest; but he saved himself, because,
 Besides being much averse from such a fate,
 There were some other reasons: the first was,
 He had been rather indisposed of late –
 And that which chiefly proved his saving clause,
 Was a small present made to him at Cadiz,
 By general subscription of the ladies. 

LXXXII.

Of poor Pedrillo something still remained,
 But was used sparingly – some were afraid,
 And others still their appetites constrained,
 Or but at times a little supper made –
 All except Juan, who throughout abstained,
 Chewing a piece of bamboo, and some lead
 At length they caught two boobies, and a noddy,
 And then they left off eating the dead body. 

LXXXIII.

And if Pedrillo’s fate should shocking be,
 Remember Ugolino condescends
 To eat the head of his arch-enemy
 The moment after he politely ends
 His tale; if foes be food in Hell, at sea
 ’Tis surely fair to dine upon our friends,
 When shipwreck’s short allowance grows too scanty,
 Without being much more horrible than Dante. 
