Christabel

[Part I.]

Part I.

’Tis the middle of night by the Castle-clock,
 And the owls have awakened the crowing cock:
 Tu-whit! Tu-whoo! 
And hark, again! the crowing cock,
 How drowsily it crew. 

Sir Leoline, the Baron rich,
 Hath a toothless mastiff bitch;
 From her kennel beneath the rock
 She makes answer to the clock,
 Four for the quarters, and twelve for the hour –
 Ever and aye, moonshine or shower,
 Sixteen short howls, not over loud
 (Some say, she sees my Lady’s shroud). 

Is the night chilly and dark? 
The night is chilly, but not dark. 
The thin grey cloud is spread on high –
 It covers but not hides the sky. 
The moon is behind, and at the full,
 And yet she looks both small and dull. 
The night is chill, the cloud is grey –
 ’Tis a month before the month of May,
 And the spring comes slowly up this way. 

The lovely lady, Christabel,
 Whom her father loves so well,
 What makes her in the wood so late,
 A furlong from the Castle-gate? 
She had dreams all yesternight
 Of her own betrothed knight –
 Dreams that made her moan and leap
 As on her bed she lay in sleep –
 And she in the midnight-wood will pray
 For the weal of her lover that’s far away. 

She stole along, she nothing spoke,
 The breezes they were still also,
 And naught was green upon the oak
 But moss and rarest mistletoe;
 She kneels beneath the huge oak-tree,
 And in silence prayeth she. 

The lady leaps up suddenly,
 The lovely lady, Christabel! 
It moaned as near, as near can be,
 But what it is she cannot tell –
 On the other side it seems to be,
 Of the huge, broad-breasted, old oak-tree! 

The night is chill; the forest bare;
 Is it the wind that moaneth bleak? 
There is not wind enough in the air
 To move away the ringlet-curl
 From the lovely lady’s cheek –
 There is not wind enough to twirl
 The one red leaf, the last of its clan,
 That dances as often as dance it can,
 Hanging so light, and hanging so high,
 On the topmost twig that looks up at the sky. 

Hush, beating heart of Christabel –
 Jesu, Maria, shield her well! 
She folded her arms beneath her cloak,
 And stole to the other side of the oak. 
What sees she there? 

There she sees a damsel bright,
 Drest in a silken robe of white;
 Her neck, her feet, her arms, bare,
 And the jewels disordered in her hair. 
I guess, ’twas frightful there to see
 A lady so richly clad as she –
 Beautiful exceedingly! 

Mary mother, save me now!’ 
Said Christabel, ‘and who art thou?’ 

The lady strange made answer meet,
 And her voice was faint and sweet:
 ‘Have pity on my sore distress –
 I scarce can speak for weariness –
 Stretch forth thy hand, and have no fear!’ 
Said Christabel, ‘How camest thou here?’ 
And the lady, whose voice was faint and sweet,
 Did thus pursue her answer meet:

My sire is of a noble line,
 And my name is Geraldine;
 Five warriors seized me yestermorn,
 Me, even me, a maid forlorn –
 They choked my cries with force and fright,
 And tied me on a palfrey white. 
The palfrey was as fleet as wind,
 And they rode furiously behind. 
They spurred amain, their steeds were white –
 And once we crossed the shade of night. 
As sure as Heaven shall rescue me,
 I have no thought what men they be;
 Nor do I know how long it is
 (For I have lain in fits, I wis)
 Since one, the tallest of the five,
 Took me from the palfrey’s back,
 A weary woman, scarce alive. 
Some muttered words his comrades spoke:
 He placed me underneath this oak,
 He swore they would return with haste –
 Whither they went I cannot tell. 
I thought I heard, some minutes past,
 Sounds as of a castle-bell. 
Stretch forth thy hand (thus ended she),
 And help a wretched maid to flee.’ 

Then Christabel stretched forth her hand,
 And comforted fair Geraldine,
 Saying that she should command
 The service of Sir Leoline,
 And straight be convoyed, free from thrall,
 Back to her noble father’s hall. 

So up she rose, and forth they passed
 With hurrying steps, yet nothing fast. 
Her lucky stars the lady blest,
 And Christabel she sweetly said:
 All our household are at rest,
 Each one sleeping in his bed;
 Sir Leoline is weak in health,
 And may not well awakened be,
 So to my room we’ll creep in stealth,
 And you tonight must sleep with me.’ 

They crossed the moat, and Christabel
 Took the key that fitted well;
 A little door she opened straight,
 All in the middle of the gate –
 The gate that was ironed within and without,
 Where an army in battle-array had marched out. 
The lady sank, belike through pain,
 And Christabel with might and main
 Lifted her up, a weary weight,
 Over the threshold of the gate –
 Then the lady rose again,
 And moved as she were not in pain. 

So free from danger, free from fear,
 They crossed the court – right glad they were! 
And Christabel devoutly cried
 To the lady by her side,
 ‘Praise we the Virgin all divine
 Who hath rescued thee from thy distress!’ 
‘Alas, alas!’ said Geraldine,
 I cannot speak for weariness.’ 
So free from danger, free from fear,
 They crossed the court – right glad they were! 

Outside her kennel, the mastiff old
 Lay fast asleep, in moonshine cold. 
The mastiff old did not awake,
 Yet she an angry moan did make! 
And what can ail the mastiff bitch? 
Never till now she uttered yell
 Beneath the eye of Christabel –
 Perhaps it is the owlet’s scritch,
 For what can ail the mastiff bitch? 

They passed the hall, that echoes still,
 Pass as lightly as you will! 
The brands were flat, the brands were dying,
 Amid their own white ashes lying;
 But when the lady passed there came
 A tongue of light, a fit of flame,
 And Christabel saw the lady’s eye –
 And nothing else saw she thereby,
 Save the boss of the shield of Sir Leoline tall,
 Which hung in a murky old niche in the wall. 
‘Oh softly tread’, said Christabel,
 ‘My father seldom sleepeth well.’ 

Sweet Christabel her feet she bares,
 And they are creeping up the stairs
 (Now in glimmer, and now in gloom),
 And now they pass the Baron’s room,
 As still as death, with stifled breath! 
And now have reached her chamber-door,
 And now with eager feet press down
 The rushes of her chamber-floor. 

The moon shines dim in the open air,
 And not a moonbeam enters here;
 But they without its light can see
 The chamber carved so curiously –
 Carved with figures strange and sweet,
 All made out of the carver’s brain,
 For a lady’s chamber meet:
 The lamp with twofold silver chain
 Is fastened to an angel’s feet. 

The silver lamp burns dead and dim;
 But Christabel the lamp will trim –
 She trimmed the lamp, and made it bright,
 And left it swinging to and fro,
 While Geraldine, in wretched plight,
 Sank down upon the floor below. 

‘Oh weary lady, Geraldine,
 I pray you, drink this cordial wine! 
It is a wine of virtuous powers –
 My mother made it of wild flowers.’ 

‘And will your mother pity me,
 Who am a maiden most forlorn?’ 
Christabel answered: ‘Woe is me! 
She died the hour that I was born. 
I have heard the gray-haired friar tell
 How on her deathbed she did say
 That she should hear the Castle-bell
 Strike twelve upon my wedding-day –
 Oh mother dear, that thou wert here!’ 
I would’, said Geraldine, ‘she were!’ 

But soon with altered voice, said she,
 ’Off, wandering mother! Peak and pine! 
I have power to bid thee flee.’ 
Alas, what ails poor Geraldine? 
Why stares she with unsettled eye? 
Can she the bodiless dead espy? 
And why with hollow voice cries she,
 ’Off, woman, off! This hour is mine –
 Though thou her guardian spirit be,
 Off, woman, off! – ’tis given to me.’ 

Then Christabel knelt by the lady’s side,
 And raised to Heaven her eyes so blue –
 ‘Alas!’ said she, ‘this ghastly ride,
 Dear lady, it hath wildered you!’ 
The lady wiped her moist cold brow,
 And faintly said, ‘’Tis over now!’ 

Again the wild-flower wine she drank:
 Her fair large eyes ’gan glitter bright,
 And from the floor whereon she sank
 The lofty lady stood upright –
 She was most beautiful to see,
 Like a lady of a far countree! 

And thus the lofty lady spake –
 ‘All they who live in the upper sky,
 Do love you, holy Christabel! 
And you love them, and for their sake
 And for the good which me befel,
 Even I in my degree will try,
 Fair maiden, to requite you well. 
But now unrobe yourself, for I
 Must pray, ere yet in bed I lie.’ 
Quoth Christabel, ‘So let it be! 
And as the lady bade, did she. 
Her gentle limbs did she undress,
 And lay down in her loveliness. 

But through her brain, of weal and woe
 So many thoughts moved to and fro
 That vain it were her lids to close;
 So half-way from the bed she rose,
 And on her elbow did recline
 To look at the lady Geraldine. 

Beneath the lamp the lady bowed,
 And slowly rolled her eyes around;
 Then, drawing in her breath aloud
 Like one that shuddered, she unbound
 The cincture from beneath her breast. 
Her silken robe and inner vest
 Dropt to her feet, and, full in view,
 Behold her bosom and half her side –
 A sight to dream of, not to tell! 
And she is to sleep with Christabel. 

[Yet Geraldine nor speaks nor stirs;
 Ah! what a stricken look was hers! 
Deep from within she seems half-way
 To lift some weight with sick assay,
 And eyes the maid and seeks delay –
 Then suddenly, as one defied,
 Collects herself in scorn and pride,] 
And lay down by the maiden’s side! 
And in her arms the maid she took,
 Ah wel-a-day! 
And with low voice and doleful look
 These words did say:
 ‘In the touch of this bosom there worketh a spell,
 Which is lord of thy utterance, Christabel! 
Thou knowest to-night, and wilt know to-morrow,
 This mark of my shame, this seal of my sorrow;
 But vainly thou warrest,
 For this is alone in
 Thy power to declare,
 That in the dim forest
 Thou heardst a low moaning,
 And foundst a bright lady, surpassingly fair;
 And didst bring her home with thee in love and in charity,
 To shield her and shelter her from the damp air.’ 
