Lalla Rookh

[Canto III (‘The Fire-Worshippers’), ll. 201 – 453]

She loves – but knows not whom she loves,
 Nor what his race, nor whence he came –
 Like one who meets, in Indian groves,
 Some beauteous bird, without a name,
 Brought by the last ambrosial breeze
 From isles in the undiscovered seas
 To show his plumage for a day
 To wondering eyes, and wing away! 
Will he thus fly – her nameless lover? 
Allah forbid! ’Twas by a moon
 As fair as this, while singing over
 Some ditty to her soft kanoon,
 Alone, at this same witching-hour,
 She first beheld his radiant eyes
 Gleam through the lattice of the bower
 Where nightly now they mix their sighs,
 And thought some spirit of the air
 (For what could waft a mortal there?) 
Was pausing on his moonlight way
 To listen to her lonely lay! 

This fancy ne’er hath left her mind,
 And though, when terror’s swoon had passed,
 She saw a youth of mortal kind
 Before her in obeisance cast,
 Yet often since, when he has spoken
 Strange, awful words, and gleams have broken
 From his dark eyes too bright to bear,
 Oh, she hath feared her soul was given
 To some unhallowed child of air,
 Some erring spirit, cast from Heaven,
 Like those angelic youths of old,
 Who burned for maids of mortal mould,
 Bewildered left the glorious skies,
 And lost their Heaven for woman’s eyes! 
Fond girl – nor fiend nor angel he,
 Who woos thy young simplicity,
 But one of Earth’s impassioned sons
 As warm in love, as fierce in ire,
 As the best here whose current runs
 Full of the Day-God’s living fire! 

But quenched tonight that ardour seems,
 And pale his cheek, and sunk his brow. 
Never before, but in her dreams,
 Had she beheld him pale as now –
 And those were dreams of troubled sleep
 From which ’twas joy to wake and weep,
 Visions that will not be forgot
 But sadden every waking scene
 Like warning ghosts, that leave the spot
 All withered where they once have been. 

‘How sweetly’, said the trembling maid,
 Of her own gentle voice afraid
 (So long had they in silence stood,
 Looking upon that moonlight flood) –
 How sweetly does the moonbeam smile
 Tonight upon yon leafy isle! 
I’ve wished that little isle had wings,
 And we, within its fairy-bowers,
 Were wafted off to seas unknown
 Where not a pulse should beat but ours
 And we might live, love, die, alone,
 Far from the cruel and the cold,
 Where the bright eyes of angels only
 Should come around us to behold
 A paradise so pure and lonely! 
Would this be world enough for thee?’ 

Playful she turned, that he might see
 The passing smile her cheek put on;
 But when she marked how mournfully
 His eyes met hers, that smile was gone,
 And, bursting into heart-felt tears,
 ‘Yes, yes’, she cried, ‘my hourly fears,
 My dreams, have boded all too right –
 We part, for ever part, tonight! 
I knew, I knew, it could not last –
 ’Twas bright, ’twas heavenly, but ’tis past! 

Oh ever thus, from childhood’s hour,
 I’ve seen my fondest hopes decay –
 I never loved a tree or flower,
 But ’twas the first to fade away! 
I never nursed a dear gazelle,
 To glad me with its soft black eye,
 But when it came to know me well,
 And love me, it was sure to die! 
Now too, the joy most like divine
 Of all I ever dreamed or knew,
 To see thee, hear thee, call thee mine –
 Oh misery! must I lose that too? 
Yet go! On peril’s brink we meet:
 Those frightful rocks, that treacherous sea –
 No, never come again – though sweet,
 Though heaven, it may be death to thee! 
Farewell, and blessings on thy way
 Where’er thou goest, belov
                  ed
                 stranger! 
Better to sit and watch that ray,
 And think thee safe, though far away,
 Than have thee near me and in danger!’ 

‘Danger – oh tempt me not to boast!’ 
The youth exclaimed, ‘Thou little knowest
 What he can brave, who, born and nursed
 In Danger’s paths, has dared the worst –
 Upon whose ear the signal-word
 Of strife and death is hourly breaking,
 Who sleeps with head upon the sword
 His fevered hand must grasp in waking! 
Danger!’ 
‘Say on! Thou fearest not then,
 And we may meet – oft meet again?’ 

‘Oh look not so! Beneath the skies
 I now fear nothing but those eyes. 
If aught on earth could charm or force
 My spirit from its destined course –
 If aught could make this soul forget
 The bond to which its seal is set,
 ’Twould be those eyes – they, only they,
 Could melt that sacred seal away! 
But no – ’tis fixed – my awful doom
 Is fixed! On this side of the tomb
 We meet no more – why, why, did Heaven
 Mingle two souls that Earth has riven,
 Has rent asunder, wide as ours? 
Oh arab maid – as soon the powers
 Of light and darkness may combine
 As I be linked with thee, or thine! 
Thy father –’
 ‘Holy Allah save
 His gray head from that lightning glance! 
Thou knowest him not – he loves the brave,
 Nor lives their under heaven’s expanse
 One who would prize, would worship thee
 And thy bold spirit, more than he! 
Oft when in childhood I have played
 With the bright falchion by his side,
 I’ve heard him swear his lisping maid
 In time should be a warrior’s bride. 
And still, whene’er at haram-hours,
 I take him cool sherbets and flowers,
 He tells me (when in playful mood)
 A hero shall my bridegroom be –
 Since maids are best in battle wooed,
 And won mid shouts of victory! 
Nay, turn not from me – thou alone
 Art formed to make both hearts thy own! 
Go, join his sacred ranks – thou knowest
 The unholy strife these Persians wage –
 Good Heaven, that frown! Even now thou glowest
 With more than mortal warrior’s rage! 
Haste to the camp by morning’s light,
 And when that sword is raised in fight
 Oh still remember love and I
 Beneath its shadow trembling lie! 
One victory o’er those slaves of fire –
 Those impious Ghebers, whom my sire
 Abhors –’
 ‘Hold, hold – thy words are death!’ 
The stranger cried, as wild he flung
 His mantle back, and showed beneath
 The Gheber belt that round him clung:
 ‘Here, maiden, look – weep – blush, to see
 All that thy sire abhors in me! 
Yes! I am of that impious race –
 Those ‘slaves of fire’ who, morn and even,
 Hail their Creator’s dwelling-place
 Among the living lights of Heaven! 
Yes! I am of that outcast few,
 To Iran and to vengeance true,
 Who curse the hour your arabs came
 To desolate our shrines of flame –
 And swear, before God’s burning eye,
 To break our country’s chains, or die! 
Thy bigot sire – nay, tremble not –
 He who gave birth to those dear eyes
 With me is sacred as the spot
 From which our fires of worship rise! 

But know, ’twas he I sought that night
 When from my watch-boat on the sea
 I caught this turret’s glimmering light,
 And up the rude rocks desperately
 Rushed to my prey! Thou knowest the rest –
 I climbed the gory vulture’s nest,
 And found a trembling dove within! 
Thine, thine, the victory – thine the sin –
 If Love has made one thought his own
 Which Vengeance claims first – last – alone! 
Oh, had we never, never met,
 Or could this heart even now forget
 How linked, how blest, we might have been,
 Had Fate not frowned so dark between! 

Hadst thou been born a Persian maid,
 In neighbouring valleys had we dwelt,
 Through the same fields in childhood played,
 At the same kindling altar knelt,
 While all those nameless ties
 In which the charm of Country lies
 Had round our hearts been hourly spun,
 Till Iran’s cause and thine were one –
 While in thy lute’s awakening sigh
 I heard the voice of days gone by
 And saw in every smile of thine
 Returning hours of glory shine –
 While the wronged spirit of our land
 Lived, looked and spoke, her wrongs through thee! 
God! who could then this sword withstand? 
Its very flash were victory! 
But now, estranged, divorced for ever
 Far as the grasp of Fate can sever,
 Our only ties what love has wove
 Faith, friends, and country, sundered wide),
 And then, then only, true to love,
 When false to all that’s dear beside;
 Thy father Iran’s deadliest foe,
 Thyself perhaps even now – but no!
 Hate never looked so lovely yet! 
No – sacred to thy soul will be
 The land of him who could forget
 All but that bleeding land for thee! 
When other eyes shall see, unmoved,
 Her widows mourn, her warriors fall,
 Thou’lt think how well one Gheber loved,
 And for his sake thou’lt weep for all. 
But look!’ 
With sudden start he turned
 And pointed to the distant wave
 Where lights, like charnel meteors, burned
 Bluely, as o’er some seaman’s grave,
 And fiery darts at intervals
 Flew up all sparkling from the main,
 As if each star that nightly falls
 Were shooting back to heaven again. 

My signal-lights! I must away –
 Both, both, are ruined if I stay. 
Farewell, sweet life – thou clingst in vain –
 Now, Vengeance, I am thine again!’ 
Fiercely he broke away, nor stopped,
 Nor looked, but from the lattice dropped
 Down mid the pointed crags beneath,
 As if he fled from life to death –
 While pale and mute young Hinda stood,
 Nor moved, till in the silent flood
 A momentary plunge below
 Startled her from her trance of woe. 
Shrieking, she to the lattice flew:
 ‘I come, I come – if in that tide
 Thou sleepst tonight, I’ll sleep there too,
 In death’s cold wedlock by thy side. 
Oh, I would ask no happier bed
 Than the chill wave my love lies under –
 Sweeter to rest together dead,
 Far sweeter, than to live asunder!’ 

But no, their hour is not yet come:
 Again she sees his pinnace fly,
 Wafting him fleetly to his home
 (Where’er that ill-starred home may lie),
 And calm and smooth it seemed to win
 Its moonlight way before the wind,
 As if it bore all peace within
 Nor left one breaking heart behind! 
