The Yeoman Farmer

On a rocky ridge my house stands,
 High above forests and lakes. 
There I saw the first light of day,
 And there it is I wish to die. 

May each tour the world at his will:
 Be master or servant whoever can! 
But I prefer to stay on my own land,
 And I prefer to be my own man. 

Fame does nothing for me at all,
 Yet her whisper lives on in my breast. 
My harvest does not depend on renown. 
Calmly I gather it each autumn. 

He who rules the earth has a thousand legs
 And a thousand arms as well. 
But they’re hard to move – my arm is never slow
 To do whatever I will. 

I don’t trust the false course of the waves
 Going on and on without peace. 
The solid earth she is my hope,
 Showing eternal trust. 

She feeds her son from her gracious breast
 During the time he is spared. 
She clasps him and holds him warm,
 When he dies, in the deep grave. 

I do not like brawling or din. 
Big tidings always come in silence. 
Soon there’ll be no trace of the storm,
 Or of the flashes of lightning. 

Silently time keeps adding on moments;
 And yet we never count its days. 
Silently the wave returns to the ocean,
 While the small brook bawls and brays. 

Likewise I too tread a quiet path:
 I am never much asked for. 
And my brothers look like me,
 Each one in his place. 

We make nourishing fare for the country. 
We feed it – the bread is from us. 
We give it its health and its strength,
 And if it bleeds – the blood flows from us. 

Each torment has its very own cry,
 But health always keeps silent;
 Therefore no-one notices me,
 And I might as well cease to exist. 

Mighty Lords, with noise and destruction,
 Tear down villages and realms;
 Silently the Peasant and his son build them up,
 Sowing in earth sprinkled with blood. 

I am not weighed down by much learning;
 The one thing I know is what’s mine;
 What is right I give to God and the King,
 And the rest I enjoy. 

The learned, the rich, they tease their brains
 To find out whose right is worth most. 
To me the right won with sweat is pure,
 Defended with one’s own blood. 

I do not always trample round my hut;
 For if my mind gets heated,
 I wander up to the Svea moot,
 With my shield upon my arm. 

Our governor tells us little
 Of politics or of the King. 
What counts is the mass of the peasantry
 And their roar when they rally to arms. 

When summoned to fight for the king,
 Each must walk away from his farm. 
Wherever the king establishes his banner,
 There battle will rage at its fiercest. 

As we swore in our mothers’ arms,
 For ancestors and home we will fight
 If our names are unknown to the annals of fame
 At least the Kings of Sweden do know us. 

Happily he sings by the crackling stove,
 On a cold winter night,
 The old man in peasant style,
 Together with his sons in his homestead. 

He counts his years on the calendar wand. 
May his kin in Sweden never end! 
The memory of the peasant goes into the grave,
 But his works and deeds outlast time. 
