The Tisza

When in the dusk a summer day had died,
 I stopped by winding Tisza’s river-side,
 just where the little Túr flows in to rest,
 a weary child that seeks its mother’s breast. 

Most smooth of surface, with most gentle force,
 the river wandered down its bankless course,
 lest the faint sunset-rays, so close to home,
 should stumble in its lacery of foam. 

On its smooth mirror, sunbeams lingered yet,
 dancing like fairies in a minuet;
 one almost heard the tinkle of their feet,
 like tiny spurs in music’s ringing beat. 

Low flats of yellow shingle spread away,
 from where I stood, to meet the meadow hay
 where the long shadows in the after-glow
 like lines upon a page lay row on row. 

Beyond the meadow in mute dignity
 the forest towered o’er the darkening lea,
 but sunset rested on its leafy spires
 like embers red as blood and fierce with fires. 

Elsewhere, along the Tisza’s farther bank,
 the motley broom and hazels, rank on rank,
 crowded, but for one cleft, through which was shown
 the distant steeple of the tiny town. 

Small, rosy clouds lay floating in the sky
 in memory-pictures of the hours gone by. 
Far in the distance, lost in reverie,
 the misty mountain-summits gazed at me. 

The air was still. Across the solemn hush
 fell but the fitful vespers of a thrush. 
Even the murmur of the far-off mill
 seemed faint as a mosquito humming shrill. 

To the far bank before me, within hail,
 a peasant-woman came to fill her pail;
 she, as she brimmed it, wondered at my stay,
 and with a glance went hastily away. 

But I stood there in stillness absolute
 as though my very feet had taken root. 
My heart was dizzy with the rapturous sight
 of Nature’s deathless beauty in the night. 

O Nature, glorious Nature, who would dare
 with reckless tongue to match your wondrous fare? 
How great you are! And the more still you grow,
 the lovelier are the things you have to show! 

Late, very late, I came back to the farm
 and supped upon fresh fruit that made me warm,
 and talked with comrades far into the night,
 while brushwood flames beside us flickered bright. 

Then, among other topics, I exclaimed:
 ‘Why is the Tisza here so harshly blamed? 
You wrong it greatly and belie its worth:
 surely, it’s the mildest river on the earth!’ 

Startled, a few days later in those dells
 I heard the frantic pealing of the bells:
 ‘The flood, the flood is coming!’ they resound. 
And gazing out, I saw a sea around. 

There, like a maniac just freed from chains,
 the Tisza rushed in rage across the plains;
 roaring and howling through the dyke it swirled,
 greedy to swallow up the whole wide world. 
