Night

I know that this my crying, like the crying
   Of owls on ruins in a wilderness,
 Wakes neither consolation nor despair. 
I know that these my tears are as a cloud   
Of barren waters in a desert land,
 That my lament, grown old with many years,
 Is strengthless in the stony hearts of men .... 
Still the unhappy heart in vain laments
   And seeks in vain to weep itself to rest. 

From my pent prison I put forth my head
   And call unto the storm and question it,
 And search the clouds and with the gloom confer —
   When will the darkness and the tempest pass? 
When will the whirlwind die and the clouds scatter   
And moon and stars break forth again in light? 
I search from heaven to earth, from earth to heaven:   
No sign, or answer — only storm and night. 

Within the womb God consecrated me   
To sickness and to poverty and said:
 Go forth and find thy vanished destiny. 
And among the ways of life buy air to breathe   
And steal with craft a beggar’s dole of light,
 Carry from door to door thy beggar’s pack;
 Before the wealthy crook the knees for bread ....   
But I am weary now with wandering:
 Ah, God, my God, how long is yet the road? 

From the dark womb, like an uncleanliness,
 On a heap of gathered foulness I was cast,
 Unwashed from filth, with rags for swaddling-clothes,
   My mother stretched to me a withered breast   
And stilled me with the bitter milk of madness. 
And in my heart a viper made its nest   
And sucks my blood to render it in poison. 
Where can I hide me from its burning fangs? 
God! answer me with either life or death. 

In the broad sky the light clouds are unraveled   
And stars among them are like single pearls. 
The wind moves dreamlike in the tranquil darkness   
And in the wind still broods the peace of God. 
And a faint whisper, like a secret kiss,
 Laden with revelation, stirs the grass,
 And sleep that heals and comforts falls on earth —
   But not on me, the outcast, — not on me. 

In the dead night-time I begin my song,
 When two alone awake, my pain and I. 
Beneath my skin my bones are turned to dust,
 My weak eyes fall, for they have wept too long. 
Now my song wakens like a bird at dawn,
 Her dewy wings beat rain into my heart
 And melt the tear-drops on my frozen eyes .... 
In vain, in vain, for tears alone I know. 

Bring me not rain-drops, but a fount of tears,
 Tears that will shake the hearts of men with storm;   
Then by the ancient mounds of desolation,
 By the ruined Temple, by my fathers’ graves,
 Where the road passes I will take my 6tand,
 And travelers on the road will pity me,
 And charity will waken with their pity. 
There let men hear thee, O my song, until
   Thy tears are ended and my pain is stilled. 
