The Death of the Wolf

I

Clouds were racing over the flaming moon
Like smoke rising over a fire;
The woods were black to the far horizon.
We were walking silently in damp grass,
In thick heather, and in the high moors,
When, under fir trees like those of Landes,
We came upon great claw prints left behind
By the travelling wolves we had been tracking.
We stopped to listen, and held our breath
In midstride. — Neither wood nor plain
Sent up a sigh; the weathervane alone
Was crying mournfully to heaven,
For the wind, raised well above the ground,
Only grazed the solitary towers,
And the oaks below, leaning on the rocks,
Seemed asleep on their elbows in bed.
So all was quiet when, lowering his head,
The oldest hunter who had joined this chase
Looked at the sand, waiting, on his knees,
For a star to cast some light on us;
Then, in a low voice, claimed these recent tracks
Revealed the path and powerful claws
Of two large Wolves and two of their young.
We all got out our knives and hid our guns
That shone too brightly in the night
And, parting branches, step by step walked on.
Three stopped, and I, looking for what they saw,
Found at once a pair of blazing eyes,
Then saw farther off some lighter forms
Dancing amid the moonlit heather,
As we see joyous greyhounds do each day,
Barking when their master comes back home.
In their shape and dance they seemed like dogs,
But the Wolf s children played in silence,
Knowing that nearby, and but half asleep,
Within his walls lies man, their enemy.
The Father stood, while off against a tree
The She-Wolf rested like the marble one
The Romans worshipped, and whose hairy flanks
Nursed the heroes Romulus and Remus.
The Wolf came and sat, his two legs trimmed
With crooked claws pressed into the sand.
He knew he was lost, having been surprised,
His escape cut off, and every path blocked;
Then with his fiery mouth he seized
The bravest dog by its panting throat,
And never loosened his iron jaws
Despite our gunfire tearing his hide
And our sharp knives stabbing like pincers,
Plunging this way and that into his guts,
Until the last moment, when the strangled dog,
Dead long before him, rolled at his feet.
The Wolf then stopped and looked at us.
The knives, up to their hilts in his side,
Nailed him to the grass drenched in his blood;
Our guns enclosed him in a sinister arc.
He looked at us again and lay down
While licking the blood pouring out of him,
And, disdaining to know why he was killed,
Closing his great eyes, died without a cry.

II

I leaned my head on my powderless gun,
And caught up in thought, could find no will
To foliow the She-Woff and her young,
Who all had wanted to wait for him.
I think his dark and lovely widow,
Without her cubs, would not have let him
Undergo his great ordeal alone.
But her duty was to save them, so she
Could teach them how to suffer hunger well,
Never to agree to the pact of towns
Which man has made with servile animals
Who in return for bed and board will hunt
The first possessors of the wood and rocks.

III

Alas! I thought, despite this great name “Man,”
How shameful we are in our feebleness!
How to quit this life and all its ills
You already know, sublime animals!
Seeing what we were on earth and what we leave,
Silence alone is great, the rest is weak.
— Oh I understood you well, wild traveller,
And your last look went deep into my heart!
It said: “If you can, make your soul arrive,
By strength of study and clear thought,
At that high degree of stoic pride
Which I, born in the woods, have long achieved.
To groan, to weep, to pray are cowardice.
— Do whole-heartedly the heavy task
To which the Fates have called you, and then,
Like me, suffer and die without a word.”
