Shade of a Friend

I sailed from the misty shores of Albion;
Beneath the leaden waves I seemed to see them sink.
In the ship’s wake fluttered the halcyon
And with its quiet singing cheered the sailors’ work.
The evening breeze, the billows’ buffeting,
The same unchanging noise, the beating of the sails,
And on the deck the helmsman's ciy
To the lookout who dreamed above the murmuring waves,
All these were food for my sweet reverie.
As if in an enchantment I stood by the mast,
And through the misty air and the grey night
My eyes were seeking my beloved Northern Star.
My thoughts were all engulfed in memory
Of my dear native land and of my native sky.
But the wind’s music and the rocking sea
Weighed on my eyes with languorous oblivion,
And dream succeeded dream
And suddenly ... was it a dream? ... I saw the friend
Who perished in the fateful fight
And by the Pleisse’s waters met his noble end.
But the sight brought no fear; his brow
Preserved no trace of his deep wounds,
And like an April morning shone with joy,
Bringing the light of heaven to my mind.
“My dear friend, is it you, comrade of my best years?
Oh, is it you? — I cried — ever beloved soldier!
Did I not weep at your untimely burial,
Lit by the fearful glare of martial flames,
Did I not with true friends inscribe
Your valour with sword’s edge on the wood,
Accompanying your soul to its celestial home
With groans and prayers and tears?
Shade of the unforgotten, dear friend, speak!
Or was the past all only a mirage, a dream,
All, the pale corpse, the grave, the solemn rite
Performed by friendship to your memory?
Oh, say one word to me! Let that familiar sound
Once more caress my eager ear,
And let me, oh my unforgotten friend,
Press your hand lovingly in mine! ...”
And I flew to him ... But the ethereal shade
Vanished in the blue depths of cloudless sky
Like smoke, a meteor, or like a nightmare vision,
And sleep fell from my eyes.

Beneath the canopy of silence, all was asleep;
The fearful elements seemed to make no noise.
From a thin veil of cloud the moon shone down,
The waves lay dark, the breeze, was barely stirring,
But sweet tranquillity had gone far from my eyes.
My soul flew where the shade had fled,
Still longing to detain its heavenly guest:
You, my dear brother, most beloved friend!
