The Farmer’s Boy

[‘Summer’, ll. 287-290, 299-303, 333-351, 369-376, 391-400]

Now, ere sweet Summer bids its long adieu,
 And winds blow keen where late the blossoms grew,
 The bustling day and jovial night must come,
 The long-accustomed feast of Harvest Home. 
Behold the round oak table’s massy frame
 Bestride the kitchen-floor! The careful dame
 And generous host invite their friends around,
 While all that cleared the crop, or tilled the ground,
 Are guests by right of custom – old and young. 
Such were the days – of days long past I sing –
 When pride gave place to mirth without a sting,
 Ere tyrant customs strength sufficient bore
 To violate the feelings of the poor,
 To leave them distanced in the madding race
 Where’er refinement shows its hated face –
 Not causeless hated: ’tis the peasant’s curse,
 That hourly makes his wretched station worse,
 Destroys life’s intercourse, the social plan
 That rank to rank cements, as man to man. 
Wealth flows round him, Fashion lordly reigns;

Yet poverty is his, and mental pains. 
Methinks I hear the mourner thus impart
 The stifled murmurs of his wounded heart:

‘Whence comes this change, ungracious, irksome, cold? 
Whence the new grandeur that mine eyes behold,
 The widening distance that I darkly see? 
Has Wealth done this? Then Wealth’s a foe to me,
 Foe to our rights. 
Our annual feast, when Earth her plenty yields,
 When crowned with boughs the last load quits the fields
 The aspect still of ancient joy puts on –
 The aspect only, with the substance gone. 
Where unaffected Freedom charmed the soul,
 The separate table and the costly bowl,
 Cool as the blast that checks the budding Spring,
 A mockery of gladness round them fling. 
Nor reigns that joy, when hand in hand they join,
 That good old Master felt in shaking mine. 
Heaven bless his memory – bless his honoured name! –
 The poor will speak his lasting worthy fame. 
To souls fair-purposed, strength and guidance give –
 In pity to us, still let goodness live –
 Let Labour have its due! My cot shall be
 From chilling want and guilty murmurs free! 
Let Labour have its due – then peace is mine,
 And never, never shall my heart repine. 
