The Vision of Judgment

[St. 15-17, 23-28, 30-32, 36-39, 47-49, 52, 57-58, 66-69, 85-87, 94-95, 97-106]

XV.

Saint Peter sat by the celestial gate,
 And nodded o’er his keys – when, lo! there came
 A wondrous noise he had not heard of late,
 A rushing sound of wind, and stream, and flame,
 In short, a roar of things extremely great,
 Which would have made all save a saint exclaim;
 But he, with first a start and then a wink,
 Said, ‘There’s another star gone out, I think!’ 

XVI.

But ere he could return to his repose,
 A cherub flapped his right wing o’er his eyes –
 At which Saint Peter yawned, and rubbed his nose. 
‘Saint Porter’, said the angel, ‘prithee rise’
 Waving a goodly wing, which glowed as glows
 An earthly peacock’s tale, with heavenly dyes);
 To which the saint replied, ‘Well, what’s the matter? 
Is Lucifer come back, with all this clatter?’ 

XVII.

‘No’, quoth the cherub, ‘George the Third is dead!’ 
‘And who is George the Third?’ replied the apostle –
 ‘What George? what Third?’ ‘The King of England’, said
 The angel. ‘Well he won’t find kings to jostle
 Him on his way! But does he wear his head? 
Because the last we saw here had a tussle,
 And ne’er would have got into Heaven’s good graces,
 Had he not flung his head in all our faces!’ 

XXIII.

While thus they spake, the angelic caravan,
 Arriving like a rush of mighty wind
 Cleaving the fields of space, as doth the swan
 Some silver stream (say, Ganges, Nile, or Inde,
 Or Thames, or Tweed), and mid them an old man
 With an old soul, and both extremely blind,
 Halted before the gate, and in his shroud
 Seated their fellow traveller on a cloud. 

XXIV.

But bringing up the rear of this bright host
 A Spirit of a different aspect waved
 His wings, like thunder-clouds above some coast
 Whose barren beach with frequent wrecks is paved. 
His brow was like the deep when tempest-tossed –
 Fierce and unfathomable thoughts engraved
 Eternal wrath on his immortal face,
 And where he gazed a gloom pervaded space. 

XXV.

As he drew near he gazed upon the gate,
 Ne’er to be entered more by him or Sin,
 With such a glance of supernatural hate
 As made Saint Peter wish himself within –
 He pottered with his keys at a great rate,
 And sweated through his apostolic skin
 (Of course his perspiration was but ichor,
 Or some such other spiritual liquor). 

XXVI.

The very cherubs huddled all together,
 Like birds when soars the falcon, and they felt
 A tingling to the tip of every feather,
 And formed a circle like Orion’s Belt
 Around their poor old charge – who scarce knew whither
 His guards had led him, though they gently dealt
 With royal manes (for by many stories,
 And true, we learn the angels all are Tories. 

XXVII.

As things were in this posture, the gate flew
 Asunder, and the flashing of its hinges
 Flung over space an universal hue
 Of many-coloured flame, until its tinges
 Reached even our speck of Earth, and made a new
 Aurora Borealis spread its fringes
 O’er the North Pole – the same seen, when ice-bound,
 By Captain Parry’s crew in Melville Sound. 

XXVIII.

And from the gate thrown open issued beaming
 A beautiful and mighty Thing of Light,
 Radiant with glory, like a banner streaming
 Victorious from some world-o’erthrowing fight
 (My poor comparisons must needs be teeming
 With earthly likenesses, for here the night
 Of clay obscures our best conceptions – saving
 Joanna Southcote, and Bob Southey raving) 

XXX.

Michael flew forth in glory and in good,
 A goodly work of Him from whom all glory
 And good arise! The portal passed, he stood,
 Before him the young cherubs and saints hoary
 (I say ‘young’, begging to be understood
 By looks, not years, and should be very sorry
 To state they were not older than Saint Peter,
 But merely that they seemed a little sweeter). 

XXXI.

The cherubs and the saints bowed down before
 That archangelic Hierarch, the first
 Of essences angelical, who wore
 The aspect of a god – but this ne’er nursed
 Pride in his heavenly bosom, in whose core
 No thought save for his Maker’s service durst
 Intrude: however glorified and high,
 He knew him but the Viceroy of the sky! 

XXXII.

He and the sombre silent Spirit met
 They knew each other both for good and ill),
 Such was their power that neither could forget
 His former friend and future foe – but still
 There was a high immortal proud regret
 In either’s eye, as if ’twere less their will
 Than destiny to make the eternal years
 Their date of war, and their champ clos the spheres. 

XXXVI.

The Archangel bowed, not like a modern beau
 But with a graceful oriental bend,
 Pressing one radiant arm just where below
 The heart in good men is supposed to tend. 
He turned as to an equal, not too low,
 But kindly: Satan met his ancient friend
 With more hauteur, as might an old Castilian
 Poor noble meet a mushroom-rich civilian. 

XXXVII.

He merely bent his diabolic brow
 An instant – and then, raising it, he stood
 In act to assert his right or wrong, and show
 Cause why King George by no means could or should
 Make out a case to be exempt from woe
 Eternal more than other kings endued
 With better sense and hearts, whom history mentions,
 Who long have ‘paved Hell with their good intentions’! 

XXXVIII.

Michael began: ‘What wouldst thou with this man,
 Now dead, and brought before the Lord? What ill
 Hath he wrought since his mortal race began,
 That thou canst claim him? Speak – and do thy will,
 If it be just! If in this earthly span
 He hath been greatly failing to fulfil
 His duties as a king and mortal, say,
 And he is thine. If not, let him have way.’ 

XXXIX.

Michael’, replied the Price of Air, ‘even here,
 Before the gate of Him thou servest, must
 I claim my subject – and will make appear
 That as he was my worshipper in dust
 So shall he be in spirit! Although dear
 To thee and thine because nor wine, nor lust,
 Were of his weaknesses, yet on the throne
 He reigned o’er millions to serve me alone! 

XLVII.

The New World shook him off, the Old yet groans
 Beneath what he and his prepared, if not
 Completed. He leaves heirs on many thrones
 To all his vices – without (what begot
 Compassion for him) his tame virtues! Drones
 Who sleep, or despots who have now forgot
 A lesson which shall be retaught them, wake
 Upon the thrones of Earth – but let them quake! 

XLVIII.

Five millions of the primitive, who hold
 The faith which makes thee great on earth, implored
 A part of that vast all they held of old –
 Freedom to worship! Not alone your Lord,
 Michael, but you, and you Saint Peter – cold
 Must be your souls if ye have not abhorred
 The foe to Catholic participation
 In all the license of a Christian nation. 

XLIX.

True he allowed them to pray God – but, as
 A consequence of prayer, refused the law
 Which would have placed them upon the same base
 With those who did not hold the Saints in awe.’ 
But here Saint Peter started from his place
 And cried, ‘You may the prisoner withdraw! 
Ere Heaven shall ope her portals to this Guelph
 While I am guard, may I be damned myself!’ 

LII.

Then Satan turned and waved his swarthy hand,
 Which stirred with its electric qualities
 Clouds farther off than we can understand
 (Although we find him sometimes in our skies). 
Infernal thunder shook both sea and land
 In all the planets, and Hell’s batteries
 Let off the artillery which Milton mentions
 As one of Satan’s most sublime inventions! 

LVII.

Upon the verge of space, about the size
 Of half-a-crown, a little speck appeared
 (I’ve seen a something like it in the skies
 In the Aegean, ere a squall); it neared,
 And, growing bigger, took another guise. 
Like an aërial ship it tacked and steered –
 Or was steered (I am doubtful of the grammar
 Of the last phrase, which makes the stanza stammer! 

LVIII.

But take your choice) – and then it grew a cloud –
 And so it was! A cloud of witnesses! 
But such a cloud! No land ere saw a crowd
 Of locusts numerous as the heavens saw these. 
They shadowed with their myriads space; their loud
 And frequent cries were like those of wild geese
 (If nations may be likened to a goose),
 And realized the phrase of ‘Hell broke loose’! 

LXVI.

A merry, cockeyed, curious-looking sprite
 Upon the instant started from the throng,
 Dressed in a fashion now forgotten quite –
 For all the fashions of the flesh stick long
 By people in the next world, where unite
 All the costumes since Adam’s (right or wrong),
 From Eve’s fig-leaf down to the petticoat,
 Almost as scanty, of days less remote. 

LXVII.

The spirit looked around upon the crowds
 Assembled, and exclaimed: ‘My friends of all
 The spheres, we shall catch cold among these clouds,
 So let’s to business! Why this general call? 
If those are freeholders I see in shrouds,
 And ’tis for an election that they bawl,
 Behold a candidate with unturned coat! 
Saint Peter, may I count upon your vote?’ 

LXVIII.

‘Sir’, replied Michael, ‘you mistake – these things
 Are from a former life, and what we do
 Above is more august. To judge of kings
 Is this tribunal met: so now you know!’ 
‘Then I presume those gentlemen with wings’,
 Said Wilkes, ‘are cherubs – and that soul below
 Looks much like George the Third, but to my mind
 A good deal older. Bless me! is he blind?’ 

LXIX.

He is what you behold him, and his doom
 Depends upon his deeds’, the Angel said:
 ‘If you have aught to arraign in him, the tomb
 Gives license to the humblest beggar’s head
 To lift itself above the loftiest.’ ‘Some’,
 Said Wilkes, ‘don’t wait to see them laid in lead,
 For such a liberty – and I, for one,
 Have told them what I thought beneath the sun!’ 

LXXXV.

At length, with jostling, elbowing, and the aid
 Of cherubim appointed to the post,
 The devil Asmodeus to the circle made
 His way (and looked as if his journey cost
 Some trouble). When his burden down he laid,
 ‘What’s this?’ cried Michael, ‘Why, ’tis not a ghost!’ 
‘I know it’, quoth the incubus, ‘but he
 Shall be one if you leave the affair to me! 

LXXXVI.

Confound the renegado! I have sprained
 My left wing, he’s so heavy – one would think
 Some of his works about his neck were chained. 
But to the point! While hovering o’er the brink
 Of Skiddaw (where as usual it still rained),
 I saw a taper far below me wink,
 And, stooping, caught this fellow at a libel –
 No less on history, than the Holy Bible! 

LXXXVII.

The former is the Devil’s scripture, and
 The latter yours, good Michael – so the affair
 Belongs to all of us, you understand. 
I snatched him up just as you see him there,
 And brought him off for sentence out of hand! 
I’ve scarcely been ten minutes in the air –
 At least, a quarter it can hardly be –
 I daresay his wife is still at tea!’ 

XCIV.

The varlet was not an ill-favoured knave:
 A good deal like a vulture in the face,
 With a hook-nose and a hawk’s eye, which gave
 A smart and sharper-looking sort of grace
 To his whole aspect, which, though rather grave,
 Was by no means so ugly as his case! 
But that, indeed, was hopeless as can be,
 Quite a poetic felony de se.’ 

XCV.

Then Michael blew his trump, and stilled the noise
 With one still greater – as is yet the mode
 On Earth besides (except some grumbling voice,
 Which now and then will make a slight inroad
 Upon a decorous silence, few will twice
 Lift up their lungs when fairly overcrowed) –
 And now the Bard could plead his own bad cause,
 With all the attitudes of self-applause! 

XCVII.

He had written praises of a regicide:
 He had written praises of all kings whatever! 
He had written for republics far and wide,
 And then against them, bitterer than ever. 
For pantisocracy he once had cried
 Aloud (a scheme less moral than ’twas clever),
 Then grew a hearty anti-jacobin –
 Had turned his coat, and would have turned his skin! 

XCVIII.

He had sung against all battles, and again
 In their high praise and glory. He had called
 Reviewing ‘the ungentle craft’, and then
 Became as base a critic as e’er crawled –
 Fed, paid, and pampered by the very men
 By whom his muse and morals had been mauled. 
He had written much blank verse, and blanker prose,
 And more of both than anybody knows! 

XCIX.

He had written Wesley’s Life – here turning round
 To Satan, ‘Sir, I’m ready to write yours,
 In two octavo volumes, nicely bound,
 With Notes and Preface, all that most allures
 The pious purchaser! And there’s no ground
 For fear, for I can choose my own reviewers –
 So let me have the proper documents
 That I may add you to my other Saints.’ 

C.

Satan bowed and was silent. ‘Well, if you,
 With amiable modesty, decline
 My offer, what says Michael? There are few
 Whose Memoirs could be rendered more divine! 
Mine is a pen of all work – not so new
 As it was once, but I would make you shine
 Like your own trumpet! By the way, my own
 Has more of brass in it, and is as well blown. 

CI.

But, talking about trumpets, here’s my Vision! 
Now you shall judge – all people – yes! You shall
 Judge with my judgment, and by my decision
 Be guided who shall enter Heaven, or fall! 
I settle all these things by intuition
 (Times present, past, to come – Heaven, Hell, and all),
 Like King Alfonso. When I thus see double
 I save the Deity some worlds of trouble! 

CII.

He ceased, and drew forth an MS – and no
 Persuasion on the part of devils, saints,
 Or angels, now could stop the torrent – so
 He read the first three lines of the Contents;
 But at the fourth, the whole spiritual show
 Had vanished, with variety of scents,
 Ambrosial and sulphureous, as they sprang
 Like lightning off from his ‘melodious twang’ 

CIII.

Those grand heroics acted as a spell:
 The angels stopped their ears, and plied their pinions;
 The devils ran howling, deafened, down to Hell;
 The ghosts fled, gibbering, for their own dominions
 (For ’tis not yet decided where they dwell,
 And I leave every man to his opinions);
 Michael took refuge in his trump – but lo! 
His teeth were set on edge, he could not blow. 

CIV.

Saint Peter, who has hitherto been known
 For an impetuous saint, upraised his keys,
 And at the fifth line knocked the poet down,
 Who fell like Phaeton, but more at ease,
 Into his lake – for there he did not drown,
 A different web being by the Destinies
 Woven for the Laureate’s final wreath, whene’er
 Reform shall happen either here or there. 

CV.

He first sank to the bottom (like his Works),
 But soon rose to the surface (like himself),
 For all corrupted things are buoyed like corks
 By their own rottenness, light as an elf
 Or wisp that flits o’er a morass! He lurks,
 It may be, still (like dull books on a shelf)
 In his own den, to scrawl some Life or Vision –
 As Welborn says, ‘the devil turned precisian’! 

CVI.

As for the rest (to come to the conclusion
 Of this true dream), the telescope is gone
 Which kept my optics free from all delusion,
 And showed me what I in my turn have shown. 
All I saw farther, in the last confusion,
 Was that King George slipped into Heaven, for one,
 And when the tumult dwindled to a calm
 I left him practising the hundredth psalm. 
