Zôphiël, or the Bride of Seven

[Canto First: Grove of Acacias, st. I-III, L-LXVIII]

Canto First.

Grove of Acacias.

I.

Shade of Columbus, here thy relics rest;
Here, while these numbers to the desert ring,
The self-same breeze that passes o’er thy breast,
Salutes me, as with panting heart, I sing.

II.

Madoc! my ancient father’s bones repose
Where their bold harps thy country’s bards enwreathed;
And this warm blood once coursed the veins of those
Who flourished where thy first faint sigh was breathed.

III.

Heroes departed both, if still ye love
These realms to which on earth, ye oped the way,
Amid the joys that crown your deeds, above,
One moment pause and deign to bless my lay!

L.

It chanced, that day, lured by the verdure, came
Zôphiël, a spirit sometimes ill; but ere
He fell, a heavenly angel. The faint flame
Of dying embers on an altar, where

Zorah, fair Egla’s sire, in secret bowed
And sacrificed to the great unseen God,
While friendly shades the sacred rites enshroud,
The spirit saw; his inmost soul was awed,

And he bethought him of the forfeit joys
Once his in Heaven; deep in a darkling grot
He sat him down; the melancholy noise
Of leaf and creeping vine accordant with his thought.

LI.

When fiercer spirits howled, he but complained
Ere yet ’twas his to roam the pleasant earth.
His heaven-invented harp he still retained,
Though tuned to bliss no more; and had its birth

Of him, beneath some black, infernal clift,
The first drear song of woe; and torment wrung
The restless spirit less, when he might lift
His plaining voice, and frame the like as now he sung.

LII.

“Woe to thee, wild ambition! I employ
Despair’s low notes thy dread effects to tell;
Born in high heaven, her peace thou couldst destroy;
And, but for thee, there had not been a Hell.

“Through the celestial domes thy clarion pealed;
Angels, entranced, beneath thy banners ranged,
And straight were fiends; hurled from the shrinking field,
They waked in agony to wail the change.

“Darting through all her veins the subtle fire,
The world’s fair mistress first inhaled thy breath;
To lot of higher beings learnt to aspire;
Dared to attempt, and doomed the world to death.

“The thousand wild desires, that still torment
The fiercely struggling soul, where peace once dwelt,
But perished; feverish hope; drear discontent,
Impoisoning all possest, — Oh! I have felt

“As spirits feel, — yet not for man we moan,
Scarce o’er the silly bird in state were he,
That builds his nest, loves, sings the morn’s return,
And sleeps at evening; save by aid of thee.

“Fame ne’er had roused, nor song her records kept;
The gem, the ore, the marble breathing life,
The pencil’s colours, all in earth had slept,
Now see them mark with death his victim’s strife.

“Man found thee, death: but Death and dull decay,
Baffling, by aid of thee, his mastery proves;
By mighty works he swells his narrow day,
And reigns, for ages, on the world he loves.

“Yet what the price? With stings that never cease
Thou goad’st him on; and when too keen the smart,
His highest dole he’d barter but for peace,
Food thou wilt have, or feast upon his heart.”

LIII.

Thus Zophiël still, though now the infernal crew
Had gained, by sin, a privilege in the world,
Allayed their torments in the cool night dew,
And by the dim starlight again their wings unfurled.

LIV.

And now, regretful of the joys his birth
Had promised, deserts, mounts, and streams he crost,
To find, amid the loveliest spots of earth,
Faint semblance of the heaven he had lost.

LV.

And oft, by unsuccessful searching pained,
Weary he fainted through the toilsome hours;
And then his mystic nature he sustained
On steam of sacrifices, breath of flowers.

LVI.

Sometimes he gave out oracles, amused
With mortal folly; resting on the shrines,
Or, all in some fair Sybyl’s form infused,
Spoke from her trembling lips, or traced her mystic lines.

LVII.

And now he wanders on from glade to glade
To where more precious shrubs diffuse their balms;
And gliding through the thickly-woven shade
Where the soft captive lay in all her charms,

He caught a glimpse. The colours in her face,
Her bare white arms, her lips, her shining hair,
Burst on his view. He would have flown the place;
Fearing some faithful angel rested there,

Who’d see him, ’reft of glory, lost to bliss,
Wandering, and miserably panting, fain
To glean a joy e’en from a place like this:
The thought of what he once had been was pain

Ineffable. But what assailed his ear?
A sigh! Surprised, another glance he took;
Then doubting — fearing — softly coming near —
He ventured to her side and dared to look;

Whispering, “Yes, ’tis of earth! So, new-found life
Refreshing, looked sweet Eve, with purpose fell,
When first sin’s sovereign gazed on her, and strife
Had with his heart, that grieved with arts of hell,

Stern as it was, to win her o’er to death.
Most beautiful of all in earth or heaven!
“Oh, could I quaff for aye that fragrant breath!
Couldst thou, or being like thee, be given

“To bloom for ever for me thus! Still true
To one dear theme, my full soul, flowing o’er,
Would find no room for thought of what it knew,
Nor picturing forfeit transport, curse me more.

LVIII.

“But, oh! severest curse! I cannot be
In what I love, blest e’en the little span
(With all a spirit’s keen capacity
For bliss) permitted the poor insect, man.

LIX.

“The few I’ve seen, and deemed of worth to win,
Like some sweet flowret, mildewed in my arms,
Withered to hideousness as foul as sin,
Grew fearful hags; and then, with potent charm

“Of muttered word and harmful drug, did learn
To force me to their will. Down the damp grave,
Loathing I went, at Endor, and uptorn,
Brought back the dead; when tortured Saul did crave

“To view his lowering fate. Fair, nay, as this
Young slumberer, that dread witch; when, I arrayed
In lovely shape, to meet my guileful kiss.
She yielded first her lip. And thou, sweet maid —
What is’t I see? — a recent tear has strayed,
And left its stain upon her cheek of bliss.

LX.

“She has fall’n to sleep in grief; haply been chid,
Or by rude mortal wrong’d. So let it prove
Meet for my purpose: ’mid these blossoms hid,
I’ll gaze; and when she wakes, with all that love

“And art can lend, come forth. He who would gain
A fond, full heart, in love’s soft surgery skill’d,
Should seek it when ’tis sore; allay its pain
With balm by pity prest: ’tis all his own so heal’d.

LXI.

“She may be mine a little year; e’en fair
And sweet as now. Oh! respite! while possest
I lose the dismal sense of my despair:
But then — I will not think upon the rest!

LXII.

“And wherefore grieve to cloud her little day
Of fleeting life? What doom from power divine
I bear eternally: pity — away!
Wake, petty fly! and, while thou mayst, be mine,

“’Though but an hour; so thou supply’st thy looms
With shining silk, and in the cruel snare
See’st the fond bird entrapped, but for his plumes,
To work thy robes, or twine amidst thy hair.”

LXIII.

To whisper softly in her ear as he bent,
But draws him back restrained: a higher power,
That loved her, and would keep her innocent,
Repelled his evil touch. And from her bower,

To lead the maid, Sephora comes; the sprite,
Half baffled, followed, hovering on unseen,
Till Meles, fair to see and nobly dight,
Received his pensive bride. Gentle of mien,

She meekly stood. He fastened round her arms
Rings of refulgent ore; low and apart
Murmuring, “So, beauteous captive, shall thy charms
For ever thrall and clasp thy captive’s heart.”

LXIV.
The air’s light touch seemed softer as she moved,
In languid resignation; his quick eye
Spoke in black glances how she was approved,
Who shrank reluctant from his ardency.

LXV.

’Twas sweet to look upon the goodly pair
In their contrasted loveliness: her height
Might almost vie with his, but heavenly fair,
Of soft proportion she, and sunny hair;
He cast in manliest mould, with ringlets murk as night.

LXVI.

And oft her drooping and resigned blue eye
She’d wistful raise to read his radiant face;
But then, why shrunk her heart? — a secret sign
Told her it most required what there it could not trace.

LXVII.

Now fair had fall’n the night. The damsel mused
At her own window, in the pearly ray
Of the full moon; her thoughtful soul infused
Thus in her words; left alone awhile to pray.

LXIX.

“What bliss for her who lives her little day
In blest obedience, like to those divine,
Who to her loved, her earthly lord can say,
‘God is thy law, most just, and thou art mine!’

“To every blast she bends in beauty meek, —
Let the storm beat, his arms her shelter kind, —
And feels no need to blanch her rosy cheek
With thoughts befitting his superior mind.

“Who only sorrows when she sees him pained,
Then knows to pluck away pain’s keenest dart;
Or bid love catch it ere its goal be gained,
And steal its venom ere it reach his heart.

“Tis the soul’s food: the fervid must adore.
For this the heathen, unsufficed with thought,
Moulds him an idol of the glittering ore,
And shrines his smiling goddess, marble-wrought.

“What bliss for her, even in this world of woe,
O Sire who mak’st yon orb-strewn arch thy throne;
That sees thee in thy noblest work below
Shrine undefaced, adored, and all her own! “

This I had hoped; but hope too dear, too great,
Go to the grave! — I feel thee blasted now.
Give me fate’s sovereign, well to bear the fate
Thy pleasure sends: this, my sole prayer, allow!”
