The Starry Sky

Come, let me take your hand! Oppressed Brother,
 Victim of torment, target of injustice! 
Come, let me take your hand, this mother let us leave,
 Who only wishes us pain and sighing! 
Come! follow me on the bright wings of hope,
 With bosom relieved from life’s long sorrow,
 To find among the circles of higher worlds
 Our rightly Home of man and our Father’s castle. 

Oh! surely I was once up high! 
Oh! surely I come from a better sphere! 
And when its light waves to my eye no more,
 Then surely will my spirit go back there. 
Tell me, who was the Lethe that drowned
 The sweet memories of Olympian days? 
No! whoever you were, I do thank You, who gave
 My sad heart its only solace. 

Deep in each bosom lay the premonition
 Woken by torment, maintained by value of sense. 
With this aim, this formation of mind
 Was Man born just for agony and delusions? 
Was there not a land or a sanctuary intended for him
 Where no tears moist the grave of dear friends? 
Where no Cimo deserts the land of his ancestors
 And no Cato flees away from Caesar’s spear. 

In vain, through the long hour of waiting
 His wet eye all over the earth’s round,
 Saw but the shores of sorrow, the mist of doubt,
 Like rain on an early autumn morning. 
It looked up into the beautiful mirror of heaven
 And the mist ran off, like a flock of light deer. 
Each flame was burning, the seal of a better world
 A torch lit for the hope of eternity. 

Behold this ball, chased by the shadows of night,
 That gently wakes the anemone from the bed of snow,
 That feeds the rosebud in days of spring
 And displays autumn covered in rich harvests. 
What? Should it not carry the proper imprint of its origin? 
What? Should it not praise a God of heavens higher
 Than the decree of revenge from the temples of fanatism
 Or cold sophistry in the guise of science? 

And Luna, you! With your shy beams,
 Your pure colour of innocence and calm;
 How fair your picture is to the sadful one,
 How his gaze does long for your mountains
 And sweetly rest upon your silver plains
 Where day’s splendour flees not the wind of the cloud
 And surely not the violence of injustice
 A withered rose on the cheeks of your sons. 

Already you are fleeing from the bright slopes of the west,
 Already your image smiles over Scandia’s calm straits. 
Already glimmer anew the burnt-out diamonds
 In purified splendour on the darkened azure. 
Who counts you, legions of heaven! 
What does Bode behold there from his terrace? 
What new zones are mirrored by Herschel? 
Another drop in the ocean of stars! 

How fair up above the hero of Dejanira,
 The lyre of Orpheus tuned to the dance of the spheres;
 Look at Orion with his golden belt;
 Look at Caelano in a wreath of siblings;
 There walks Zeus, forgetful of his ruleress,
 Amidst the charms of four smiling maidens,
 There Venus, like a faithful lover,
 The last to run off from Eternity’s day. 

I no more see images among these wonders,
 I see the works of the Father of Nature,
 Where each one has its own form, its orbit, its moments,
 But the same basic force, the same purpose. 
I observe the comet, governed by the law of Kepler
 In blood-stained armour, in a threatened leap. 
No more crushing the frightened planet,
 No more foretelling the decline of its nations! 

From the flare of day to the gentle flame of night
 All is moved within safe circles of systems,
 The Prince around which eleven Nobles march,
 Is himself brought before a King unknown to us. 
And that one’s sceptre rules higher powers
 And so through a million Centres
 I finally approach in my high frenzy
 The Centre of all worlds, the Creator’s throne. 

Presumptuous eye, lifted to the zone Divine! 
Where already a thousand suns blind your sight! 
Compared to the splendour of those who surround the throne of heaven
 The day that shattered the clouds is a dusk. 
When Moses was allowed to behold the Holy one
 He only saw him shrouded in a cloud,
 But no one could look at Moses without peril
 And this cover proved that he had seen God. 

I do not have the spirit of Moses, the mind of Moses
 (My weak heart was oftentimes criminal,
 Many a time desires are rageing in there) –
 And yet I dare approach You my Father! 
You ordered the star of Hope to burn for me,
 You lit up the course that my eye ran,
 And to where my farglasses could not reach
 You brought me on the wings of thought. 

From your throne in the world’s hour of dawn
 I hear, Oh God! A ‘Let there be!’ and I see
 Millions of balls gleaming from the purple of East,
 Millions of life in worship on our sphere. 
From You to all do life and force spread,
 Around you systems in harmonic singing
 Further away in long circles glide,
 Or run nigh, like the leap of lightning. 

I look through moments of centuries passed,
 I go from zone to zone, from pole to pole. 
Still celebrated you around these trajectories
 The pettiest earth, suns of the biggest worlds,
 An image of You, an image of immortality
 Stands before your throne in the first splendour of youth,
 Your Urania, your image; and eternity
 Sees not one wilted flower in its wreath. 

Where are You? Where is the Earth? Good Father! 
Is she far away from your abode? Pray tell? 
In which one of the many grades of the system
 Does she describe her safe circular way? 
I do not know! One look at the fools on Earth
 Transport me to the edge of the Firmament;
 One look at the genius, at the tears of a Noble man
 Removes the way and makes your presence felt. 

And wherever you are your eye reaches me,
 Among the extolation of Angels my dull voice is heard! 
Each morning sun reminds me of your goodness,
 Each evening sun of your mild paternal voice! 
In vain the gale shakes its wings,
 In vain the bolt thunders around our abode. 
High above us your Good spirit keeps wake,
 Like the Polar star over the mountains of the North! 
