Bread and Wine

To Heinse.

1

Round us the town is at rest; the street, in pale lamplight, grows quiet
And, their torches ablaze, coaches rush through and away.
People go home to rest, replete with the day and its pleasures,
There to weigh up in their heads, pensive, the gain and the loss,
Finding the balance good; stripped bare now of grapes and o flowers,
As of their hand-made goods; quiet the market stalls lie.
But faint music of strings comes drifting from gardens; it could be
Someone in love who plays there, could be a man all alone
Thinking of distant friends, the days of his youth; and the fountains,
Ever welling and new, plash amid fragrance from beds.
Church-bells ring; every stroke hangs still in the quivering half-light
And the watchman calls out, mindful, no less, of the hour.
Now a breeze rises too and ruffles the crests of the coppice,
Look, and in secret our globe’s shadowy image, the moon,
Slowly is rising too; and Night, the fantastical, comes now
Full of stars and, I think, little concerned about us,
Night, the astonishing, there, the stranger to all that is human.
Over the mountain-tops mournful and gleaming draws on.

2

Marvellous is her favour, Night’s, the exalted, and no one
Knows what it is or whence comes all she does and bestows.
So she works on the world and works on our souls ever hoping,
Not even wise men can tell what is her purpose, for so
God, the Highest, has willed, who very much loves you, and therefore
Dearer even than Night reasoning Day is to you.
Nonetheless there are times when clear eyes too love the shadows
Tasting sleep uncompelled, trying the pleasure it gives,
Or a loyal man too will gaze into Night and enjoy it,
Yes, and rightly to her garlands we dedicate, hymns,
Since to all those astray, the mad and the dead she is sacred,
Yet herself remains firm, always, her spirit most free.
But to us in her turn, so that in the wavering moment,
Deep in the dark there shall be something at least that endures,
Holy drunkenness she must grant and frenzied oblivion,
Grant the on-rushing word, sleepless as lovers are too,
And a wine-cup more full, a life more intense and more daring,
Holy remembrance too, keeping us wakeful at night.

3

And in vain we conceal our hearts deep within us, in vain we,
Master and novice alike, still keep our courage in check.
For who now would stop us, who would forbid us rejoicing?
Day-long, night-long we’re urged on by a fire that’s divine.
Urged to be gone. Let us go, then! Off to see open spaces,
Where we may seek what is ours, distant, remote though it be!
One thing is sure even now: at noon or just before midnight,
Whether it’s early or late, always a measure exists,
Common to all, though his own to each one is also allotted,
Each of us makes for the place, reaches the place that he can.
Well, then, may jubilant madness laugh at those who deride it,
When in hallowed Night poets are seized by its power;
Off to the Isthmus, then! To land where wide open the sea roars
Near Parnassus and snow glistens on Delphian rocks;
Off to Olympian regions, up to the heights of Cithaeron,
Up to the pine-trees there, up to the grapes, from which rush
Thebe down there and Ismenos, loud in the country of Cadmus:
Thence has come and back there points the god who’s to come.

4

Happy land of the Greeks, you house of them all, of the Heavenly,
So it is true what we heard then, in the days of our youth?
Festive hall, whose floor is ocean, whose tables are mountains,
Truly, in time out of mind built for a purpose unique!
But the thrones, where are they? Where are the temples, the vessels,
Where, to delight the gods, brim-full with nectar, the songs?
Where, then, where do they shine, the oracles winged for far targets?
Delphi’s asleep, and where now is great fate to be heard?
Where is the swift? And full of joy omnipresent, where does it
Flash upon dazzled eyes, thundering fall from clear skies?
Father Aether! one cried, and tongue after tongue took it up then,
Thousands, no man could bear life so intense on his own;
Shared, such wealth gives delight and later, when bartered with strangers,
Turns to rapture; the word gathers new strength when asleep:
Father! Clear light! and long resounding it travels, the ancient
Sign handed down, and far, striking, creating, rings out.
So do the Heavenly enter, shaking the deepest foundations,
Only so from the gloom down to mankind comes their Day.

5

Unperceived at first they come, and only the children
Surge towards them, too bright, dazzling, this joy enters in,
So that men are afraid, a demigod hardly can tell yet
Who they are, and name those who approach him with gifts.
Yet their courage is great, his heart soon is full of their gladness
And he hardly knows what’s to be done with such wealth,
Busily runs and wastes it, almost regarding as sacred
Trash which his blessing hand foolishly, kindly has touched,
This, while they can, the Heavenly bear with; but then they appear in
Truth, in person, and now men grow accustomed to joy,
And to Day, and the sight of godhead revealed, and their faces —
One and All long ago, once and for all, they were named —
Who with free self-content had deeply suffused silent bosoms,
From the first and alone satisfied every desire.
Such is man; when the wealth is there, and no less than a god in
Person tends him with gifts, blind he remains, unaware.
First he must suffer; but now he names his most treasured possession,
Now for it words like flowers leaping alive he must find.

6

Now in earnest he means to honour the gods who have blessed him,
Now in truth and in deed all must re-echo their praise.
Nothing must see the light but what to those high ones is pleasing.
Idle and bungled work never for Aether was fit.
So, to be worthy and stand unashamed in the heavenly presence.
Nations rise up and soon, gloriously ordered, compete
One with the other in building beautiful temples and cities,
Noble and firm they tower high above river and sea —
Only, where are they? Where thrive those famed ones, the festival’s garlands?
Athens is withered, and Thebes; now do no weapons ring out
In Olympia, nor now those chariots, all golden, in games there,
And no longer are wreaths hung on Corinthian ships?
Why are they silent too, the theatres, ancient and hallowed?
Why not now does the dance celebrate, consecrate joy?
Why no more does a god imprint on the brow of a mortal
Struck, as by lightning, the mark, brand him, as once he would do?
Else he would come himself, assuming a shape that was human,
And, consoling the guests, crowned and concluded the feast.

7

But, my friend, we have come too late. Though the gods are living,
Over our heads they live, up in a different world.
Endlessly there they act and, such is their kind wish to spare us,
Little they seem to care whether we live or do not.
For not always a frail, a delicate vessel can hold them,
Only at times can our kind bear the full impact of gods.
Ever after our life is dream about them. But frenzy,
Wandering, helps, like sleep; Night and distress make us strong
Till in that cradle of steel heroes enough have been fostered.
Hearts in strength can match heavenly strength as before.
Thundering then they come. But meanwhile too often I think it’s
Better to sleep than to be friendless as we are, alone,
Always waiting, and what to do or to say in the meantime
I don’t know, and who wants poets at all in lean years?
But they are, you say, like those holy ones, priests of the wine-god
Who in holy Night roamed from one place to the next.

8

For, when some time ago now — to us it seems ages —
Up rose all those by whom life had been brightened, made glad,
When the Father had turned his face from the sight of us mortals
And all over the earth, rightly, they started to mourn.
Lastly a Genius had come, dispensing heavenly comfort,
He who proclaimed the Day’s end, then himself went away,
Then, as a token that once they had been down here and once more would
Come, the heavenly choir left a few presents behind,
Gifts in which now as ever humanly men might take pleasure,
Since for spiritual joy great things had now grown too great
Here, among men, and even now there’s a lack of those strong for
Joy’s extremity, but silent some thanks do live on.
Bread is a fruit of Earth, yet touched by the blessing of sunlight,
From the thundering god issues the gladness of wine.,
Therefore in tasting them we think of the Heavenly who once were
Here and shall come again, come when their advent is due; ho
Therefore also the poets in serious hymns to the wine-god,
Never idly devised, sound that most ancient one’s praise.

9

Yes, and rightly they say he reconciles Day with our Night-time,
Leads the stars of the sky upward and down without end,
Always glad, like the living boughs of the evergreen pine-tree
Which he loves, and the wreath wound out of ivy for choice
Since it lasts and conveys the trace of the gods now departed
Down to the godless below, into the midst of their gloom;
What of the children of God was foretold in the songs of the ancients,
Look, we are it, ourselves; fruit of Hesperia it is!
Strictly it has come true, fulfilled as in men by a marvel,
Let those who have seen it believe! Much, however, occurs,
Nothing succeeds, because we are heartless, mere shadows until our
Father Aether, made known, recognized, fathers us all.
Meanwhile, though, to us shadows comes the Son of the Highest,
Comes the Syrian and down into our gloom bears his torch.
Blissful, the wise men see it; in souls that were captive there gleams a
Smile, and their eyes shall yet thaw in response to the light.
Dreams more gentle and sleep in the arms of Earth lull the Titan,
Even that envious one, Cerberus, drinks and lies down.
