Meditation

Oh, sadly do I view the present generation
With its unpromising and uninspiring growth!
Oppressed by heavy doubts and sterile education,
It ages fast in idleness and sloth.
Upon us all our fathers have been pouring
The warnings of the weak and wisdom’s late behests;
The life that faces us is long and deadly boring —
A banquet for unbidden guests.
We wither young, submissive and unhardened;
Good does not bring us joy, nor evil bring remorse.
By danger instandy, ingloriously disheartened,
We are obsequious slaves of every frowning force.
A fruit hangs so sometimes in early summer,
Precocious, thin, offensive to the eye and taste,
Among the blossoms hid, a pitiful newcomer,
By nature's triumph, by autumn’s yield disgraced.

We study useless things, unpractical and arid,
But deep within, from everybody locked,
We keep our nobler hopes and have since childhood carried
The voice of passions ridiculed and mocked.
We touched the cup of ecstasy with trepidation
And thought to put our strength to better use;
And every joy we’ve had, afraid of satiation,
We’ve robbed forever of its precious juice.

The dreams of poetry have ceased to give us pleasure,
We are indifferent to genius and to art,
But miser-like we guard our last and worthless treasure,
The relics of the warmth once buried in the heart.
We even hate by chance, and love will seldom bless us,
For we are loath to risk for love’s or hatred’s sake.
Some ruthless, secret frost congeals our soul’s recesses,
When burning passions are at stake.
Our fathers’ daring sins make an insipid story.
Those sumptuous revelries, that studied, childish lust!
The road we slowly tread has neither joy nor glory,
And yesterday is simply dust.

A mirthless, sullen crowd, by people soon forgotten,
We’ll vanish from this world without a noise or trace,
Without a masterpiece by miracle begotten,
Or anything to save the human race.
When judged by better men and offspring coming after,
We all shall be condemned in a derisive verse;
We’ll quit like spendthrifts ’mid disdainful laughter
And take with us our children’s curse.
