The Crimean Sonnets.

[sonnets 6, 10, 13]

VI. Bakhchisarai

Still vast, but desolate, the dwelling of the Girey kings! 
On stairs, in vestibules once brushed by Pashas’ brows
 And across sofas that were thrones of power, sanctuaries of love,
 Grasshoppers veer and bounce, the serpent winds,
 And rank vines crawl through myriad-colored windows
 To invade mute vaults and voicless halls, conquer
 Man’s labor in the name of nature, and inscribe
 There in the letters of Balthazar: DESTRUCTION. 
In the center of a hall, a basin hewn in marble:
 The fountain of the harem, still intact,
 Whispers its tearful pearls alone, as if to ask:
 Where are they, grandeur, power and love? Their term
 Was to have been forever, and the stream’s, ephemeral,
 But they have passed and the white fount is here. 

X. Baidar

Urging my horse into the wind, I spare
 No spur. Woods, valleys, rocks, in surge rush by
 And vanish like a torrent’s furious foam;
 And by the swirl of images I’m stunned. 
But when my charger races out of hand,
 And all the world’s brave colour’s dimmed in dusk,
 Then, in my burning eyes, as in grey glass,
 The ghosts of forest, valley, rock, flash past. 
The wave in chaos breaks above my head:
 I wait – till all my thoughts be whirled away
 And swept into oblivion for a while. 

XIII. Chatir Dah

Trembling the Muslim comes to kiss the foot of your crags,
 Mast on Crimea’s raft, towering Chatir Dah! 
Minaret of the World! Mightiest Padishah
 Of Mountains! From the plain Fugitive into the Clouds! 
As great Gabriel once stood over portals of Eden,
 You at Heaven’s Gate watch, wrapped in your forest cloak,
 And, in turban of clouds with lightning flashes bespangled,
 On your forehead you wear janissaries of dread. 
Hot sun may roast our limbs, mountain mists blind our eyes,
 Locusts may eat our grain, infidels burn our homes,
 You, Chatir Dah, would still, unmindful of man’s fate,
 Rise between earth and sky, Dragoman of Creation;
 Far spreads the plain at your feet, home of men and of thunder,
 But you can only hear what God to nature speaks. 
