The Dead of the Wilderness

Yonder great shadow — that blot on the passionate glare   of the desert —
 ’Tis not an army of lions couched in. the sun with their   young ones,
 ’Tis not the pride of the forests of Bashan uprooted and   fallen:
 Those are the Dead of the Wilderness under the sunlight recumbent. 
Hard by their tents are they laid, like children of Anak   for stature,”
 Stretched on the desolate sands like numberless lions   in slumber;
 Under the might of their limbs the floor of the desert   is hollowed. 
Armed as for battle they sleep and clad in the armor   of giants;
 Swords like crags at their heads and spears twixt their   shoulders protruding,
 Sound to their girdle the quiver and firm in the sand is   the lance thrust. 

Deep in the earth are their heads sunk, heavy with   tangles neglected,
 Matted and monstrous and vast, and uncouth as the   mane of a lion;
 Matted and monstrous and vast are their beards like to   tangles of serpents. 
Strong are their faces and burnished, and darkened to   bronze are their eyelids,
 Targets to arrows of sunlight and rocks to the fury of   tempests. 
Hard are their foreheads and grim and changeless upturned to the heavens,
 Eyes that are cruel and terrible peer through the tangle   of eyebrows. 
Cast as of lava upthrown from volcanoes and hardened   their breasts are
 Lifted like anvils of iron that wait for the blow of the   hammer;
 Yet though the hammer of time beats long and unceasing upon them,
 Like to the stone that enfolds it the ifrength of their   hearts sleeps for ever. 
Only, the faces unmoving, the breasts multitudinous,   naked,
 Strangely are covered, like ancient memorials, with runes   of the desert
 Graven by arrows and swords which the tempests have   tossed and uplifted. 
And when the eagle descends in his flight to behold he   shall read there,
 Graven on breast and on brow, the tale of unbroken   endurance,
 How many arrows and spears these breasts have encountered and shattered. 
Sunlight and darkness revolve and cycle succeeds unto   cycle,
 Stormwinds awake and are stilled and the desert turns   back to its silence. 
Far stand the crags, as amazed in beholding the first   things created,
 Clothed by the silence with splendor, the proud, the   eternally lonely,
 Limitless, limidess stretches the wilderness, lifeless and   soundless. 
Lost to the end of all time is the jubliant voice of the   giants,
 Laid into stillness for ever the tumult that followed their   footsteps;
 Where they once trod are now lifted the sandhills and   crags of the desert. 
Silence has breathed on the mighty and cast into slumber   their fierceness. 
And the hot winds of the desert eaten their strength and   their beauty. 

Fierce burns the sun on the blades gigantic and wears   them to brightness;
 Blinding arrows of sunlight shot at the heads of the   lances
 Break into myriads of sparks that are dashed on the   breasts of the sleepers
 Lying there bared to the desolate sunlight for ever and   ever. 
Dried by the withering east-wind, oust of their bodies is   lifted,
 Whirled into other lands, scattered under the footsteps   of pygmies;
 Jackals there nuzzle with unclean snouts in the ruins of   heroes. 
No one remembers among them the old generation of   giants
 Fallen and turned into voiceless stone in the sands of   the desert .... 
Sometimes a shadow is born alone on the face of the   desert,
 Floats on the sands till it reaches the ranks of the army   of sleepers,
 Trembles a moment above them and breaks into circles   of motion,
 Suddenly chooses a body outstretched and over it stands   and is moveless;
 And the body beneath it is darkened and half of its   neighbor. 
Suddenly quivers the air as the pinions stupendous are   folded. 
Full with his weight like a meteor descending he falls   on his victim —
 One of the eagle-kings, crag-born, crooked of beak and   of talon. 
Over the breast of the sleeper a granite-like talon is   lifted;
 Yet but an instant anti granite on granite will ring in   the stillness;
 And in that instant he pauses and stands with his talon   uplifted,
 Stilled and rebuked in his pride by the loftier pride of   the sleeper;
 Wondering stands, then unfolds the strength of his   pinions and rises,
 Beating great waves through the air and screaming in   stretches of sunlight,
 Scales untiring the measureless heights and is lost in the   splendor. 
Long, long after still flutters, held fast on the point of   a lancehead,
 One gray feather that fell unseen and unmarked was   abandoned,
 Flutters and strains at the lance-head and fluttering   earthwards is wasted. 
Silence returns to the desert and peace to the sleep of   the heroes. 
Sometimes when midday is hot and the desert swoons   under the sunlight,
 Slides from its fastness a serpent, vast as the beam of a   weaver,
 Issues to warm on the sands the glistening rings of his   body. 
Now he shrinks on himself, coils himself moveless and   breathless,
 Languid with joy in the warmth and bathing in light   as in waters;
 Now he wakes and uncoils and stretches his length in   the sunlight,
 Opens the width of his jaws and his scales are like net   work of lightnings,
 Spangled "and'knitted in splendor, a lonely delight in   the desert. 
Sudden he starts from his languor, leaps into rigid attention,
 Bends and unwinds on the sand, then swiftly he glides   from his station
 Over the waste till he reaches the army of sleepers and   stands then,
 Lifted one-third in the air, like a column of bright   hieroglyphics,
 Raises his crown and outstretches his neck and his eye   balls green sparkle. 
Swaying he broods on the slumbering army from margin   to margin. 
Vast is the soundless encampment and countless the dead   it encloses,
 Numberless, numberless faces and foreheads exposed to   the heavens. 

Then like a flash reawakens the hatred of dead generations,
 Gleams in the start of his eyes like a brand that is   sudden uncovered. 
Hatred instinctive and ancient runs through the shuddering body. 
Trembling he lowers his head and darts with it hither   and thither,
 Hangs then suspended an infant and Glares in the face of   a sleeper. 
Under their hoods are his eyeballs twin centers of   hatred and fury;
 Hissing he opens his jaws and the flash of his fangs   is uncovered —
 And in that infant he pauses, sinks on the coils of his   body,
 Stilled and rebuked in his rage by the bitterer rage of   the sleeper, —
 Sinks and uncircles his length and turns from the visage   of granite,
 Moves off, a rhythm of waves till his splendor is lost   in the distance. -
 Silence returns to the desert and peace to the sleep of   the heroes. 

Moonlight descends on the waste and sleeps on the   measureless broadness,
 Lays on, the desert a garment speckled with light and   with shadow. 
Pallid the wilderness league after league rolls from dim   ness to dimness. 
Broad at the foot of the towering crags are their shadows   recumbent,
 Couched like dragons primeval, things from the dawn   of creation. 
Gathered in monstrous conspiracy under the cover of   darkness —
 They will arise ere the morning, return to the caverns   they came from. 
Mournful the moon from her loneliness looks on the   mystery threefold —
 Wilderness, midnight and monsters crept out from the   dawn of creation. 
Lapped is the desert in merciless dreams of its old deso   lation,
 Wails in its dreams, and its wailing half-uttered is broken   and stifled. 

Sometimes a wandering lion, thewed as with roots of   an oak tree,
 Massive and certain of footstep comes down to the army   and stands there,
 Raises his head from his shoulders, heavy, magnificent -   crested. 
Fitfully gleam the two eyeballs over the enemy army;
 Vast is the army outspread and its vastness is utterly   silent;
 Dark is the sleep of the heroes, there is. not an eyelid   aflutter. 
Shadows of lances, like thongs, are close on. their bodies   and bind them. 
Moonlight is spilled on their faces and rims the black   mass of their eyebrows. 
Stonelike in wonder the lion Glares at their slumbering   power,
 Till from his wonder awaking he shakes with his roaring   the desert,
 Startling the mountains and setting the flanks of the   desert atremble. 
Far pours the strength of his voice, and the crags in   the distance give answer,
 Hither and thither is rolled till it crumbles in fragments of thunder. 
Then in a wailing responsive arises the cry of the   jackals,
 Mingles with howling of beasts till the night-time is   hideous with voices —
 This is the wail of the desert, a desperate protest and   bitter,
 Worn with the infinite vigil and weary with long desolation. 
Still stands the lion, intent on the tumult his strength has   awakened;
 Silent he turns from the dead and is kingly again in   his silence. 
Turns and departs like a king and his eyes are like   torches attendant,
 Massive and certain of step departs and is lost in the   darkness. 
Long is the desert awake and its bitterness will not be   silenced,
 Long it moans for its ancient pain and the comfortless   future. 
Dawn returns and the desert is weary from moaning,   and slumbers,
 Slumbers and yet is awake, and shrinks from the day and   its evil. 
Slow dies the moon in her pallor and drops to the rim   of the heavens;
 Stealthy the shadows arise from under the crags, and   they are not. 
Gaunt stand the rocks to the morning and anger is   written upon them;
 Under the wrath of their looks the desert is timid and   trembles,
 Strains to answer with anger responsive and fails and   is voiceless,
 Stilled by the shattering sun. And silence returns as for   ever. 
Deep is the sleep of the heroes ... and cycle succeeds   unto cycle. 

But there are moments when, tortured too long by the   silence eternal,
 Wild with unbearable sickness of sons, the desert uprises,
 Wakens and rages for vengeance against the inhuman   Creator,
 Raises a column of sand to ascend to the fastness of   heaven,
 Once and for ever to meet Him and shatter the throne   of His glory,
 Once for the torture eternal to loose the floods of its   fury,
 Sweep his whole world into darkness and bring back the   kingdom of chaos .... 
Then the Creator is stirred, and His anger envelops the   heavens,
 Like a great cover of iron, He bends them to blot out   the desert. 
Red from the blast of His breath, the flame of His anger   outbreaking
 Wraps the desert in fury and scatters its crags in a   furnace. 
Stubborn and bitter the desert responds, and new furies   are loosened,
 Rise from the bowels of Hell, and all earth is in fury   confounded. 
Seized by the madness that spins 'like a vehement wheel   in the vastness
 Tigers and lions, with manes unlifted and eyeballs   aglitter,
 Join in the riot infernal, and howl with the Voice of the   tempest,
 Lifted and torn by the strength of the tempesT like   gossamer insects. 
And in that instant —
 Wakes the terrible power that slumbered in chains,
 Suddenly stirs and arises the old generation of heroes. 
Mighty in battle: their eyes are like lightning, like blades   are their faces. 
Then flies the hand to the sword. 
Sixty myriads of voices — a thunder of heroes — awaken. 
Crash through the tempest and tear asunder the rage   of the desert. 
Round them in wildness and blindness:
 And they cry
 “We are the mighty! 
The last generation of slaves and the first generation   of freemen! 
Alone our hand in its strength
 Tore from the pride of our shoulders the yoke of   bondage. 
We lifted our heads to the heavens and behold their   broadness was narrow in the pride of our eyes,
 So we turned to the desert, we said to the Wilderness:   ‘Mother!’ 
Yea, on the tops of the crags, in the thickness of clouds,
   With the eagles of heaven we drank from her fountains   of freedom. 
And who is lord of us? 
Even now, though the God of vengeance has shut the   desert upon us,
 A song of strength and revolt has reached us, and we   arise. 
To arms! To arms! Form ranks! Forward! 
Forward into the heavens and the wrath thereof.   
Behold us! We will ascend
   With the tempest! 
Though the Lord has withdrawn His hand from us,
 And the Ark stands moveless in its place,
 Still we will ascend — alone! 
Even under the eye of His wrath, daring the lightning   of His countenance,
 We will carry with storm the citadels of the hills,
 And face to face in combat encounter the armed foe!   
Listen! 
The storm, too, calls unto us — ‘Courage and daring!’ 
To arms! To arms! Let the hills be shattered and the   mountains blasted into dust,
 Or let our lifeless bodies be heaped in countless cairns.   
Forward! 
On to the hills!” 

And in that instant the desert is wild with a fierce   anger —
 And who shall conquer it? 
In the storm goes up a terrible voice, a mingling of cries. 
It must surely
 That the desert is bringing to birth a deed of evil,
 A bitter thing, a cruel and a terrible .... 

Passed is the tempest. The desert is silent, and pure is   the silence. 
Bright is the broadness of heaven, and marvelous quiet   beneath it. 
Now from their terror awaking, the caravans trapped in   the tempest
 Rise from their crouching and call on their God and   adore Him and praise Him. 
Still in the sand are the sixty myriads of heroes aslumber. 
Darkened their faces, for death has brought them to   peace with their Maker. 
No man knoweth the place of their slumber. The crags   of the desert,
 Split by the strength of their rising, over them closed in   their falling. 
Sometimes a rider, in daring adventure his caravan   leaving,
 Spurs his horse ever onwards and enters the heart of   the desert. 
Strong is the heart of the rider, and swift is the horse to   the spurring. 
Riding he flings up his spear in the sunlight, and takes   it descending,
 Throws it and takes it again, and throws it again and   pursues it;. 
Like to a river of lightning it flashes and dances before   him. 
Far in the distance a vision appears, and the horse is   drawn onwards,
 Mounts with its rider a hill the clouds overtopping —   and sudden,
 Quivering it pauses and looks, then bounds to the rear   by its whole length. 
Startled the rider uplifts his hand for a shadow and   gazes .... 
Stonelike he stands with his horse, and the terror of God   is upon him. 
Then leaps the horse in its strength and, turning, descends like an arrow ....
 l'ast spurs the rider and halts not until, with his caravan meeting,
 Swift he dismounts and tells of the vision he saw in the   stillness. 
Marveling listen the Arabs, and wonder is writ on their faces. 
Then speaks the oldest amongst them, a patriarch sprung   from the Prophet,
 Answers the tale of the rider: “Blessed be Allah the   True One;
 For by the Beard of the Prophet, it was not a vision   thou sawest. 
Those are the Dead of the Wilderness thou hast discovered and gazed on. 
This was the host of the Lord, a people of valor gigantic,
 Older than man can remember — yea, of the first gener   tions,
 Stubborn and strong was this people, stiff-necked as the   crags of the desert,
 Deaf to the word of their Prophet, and proud with the   God of their fathers. 
Therefore He cast sleep upon them, and sealed up their   path with the mountains,
 Laid His command on the wilderness for a memorial   eternal. ... 
Allah protect true Believers from touching the hem of   their garments. 
Once did a son of the Faithful lay hand on a fringe and   uplift it. 
Withered his body became till the fringe was restored to   the sleeper. 
These are the sires of the race of the Book ....” 
Then the speaker is silent,
 Wordless the Arabs have heard, and they tremble and   give praise to Allah. 
Silent they walk at the side of their camels to weariness   laden. 
Long is the whiteness that gleams on their hoods to be   seen in the distance. 
Slow sway the camels their monstrous backs till they fail   in the brightness,
 Bearing away from the desert one more of its marvelous   legends. 
Stillness returns as of old. Desolate stretches the desert. 
