Michael

[Ll. 217-490]

While this good household thus were living on
 From day to day, to Michael’s ear there came
 Distressful tidings. Long before the time
 Of which I speak, the shepherd had been bound
 In surety for his brother’s son, a man
 Of an industrious life and ample means,
 But unforeseen misfortunes suddenly
 Had pressed upon him, and old Michael now
 Was summoned to discharge the forfeiture –
 A grievous penalty, but little less
 Than half his substance. This unlooked-for claim,
 At the first hearing, for a moment took
 More hope out of his life than he supposed
 That any old man ever could have lost. 
As soon as he had gathered so much strength
 That he could look his trouble in the face,
 It seemed that his sole refuge was to sell
 A portion of his patrimonial fields. 
Such was his first resolve; he thought again,
 And his heart failed him. 
‘Isabel’, said he,
 Two evenings after he had heard the news,
 ‘I have been toiling more than seventy years,
 And in the open sunshine of God’s love
 Have we all lived, yet if these fields of ours
 Should pass into a stranger’s hands, I think
 That I could not lie quiet in my grave. 
Our lot is a hard lot; the sun itself
 Has scarcely been more diligent than I,
 And I have lived to be a fool at last
 To my own family. An evil man
 That was, and made an evil choice, if he
 Were false to us; and if he were not false,
 There are ten thousand to whom loss like this
 Had been no sorrow. I forgive him – but
 ’Twere better to be dumb than to talk thus! 
When I began, my purpose was to speak
 Of remedies and of a cheerful hope. 
Our Luke shall leave us, Isabel; the land
 Shall not go from us, and it shall be free –
 He shall possess it, free as is the wind
 That passes over it. We have, thou knowest,
 Another kinsman; he will be our friend
 In this distress. He is a prosperous man,
 Thriving in trade, and Luke to him shall go
 And with his kinsman’s help and his own thrift
 He quickly will repair this loss, and then
 May come again to us. If here he stay,
 What can be gained?’ 
At this the old man paused,
 And Isabel sat silent, for her mind
 Was busy looking back into past times:
 ‘There’s Richard Bateman’, thought she to herself,
 ‘He was a parish-boy – at the church-door
 They made a gathering for him, shillings, pence
 And halfpennies, wherewith the neighbours bought
 A basket, which they filled with pedlar’s wares,
 And with this basket on his arm the lad
 Went up to London, found a master there,
 Who out of many chose the trusty boy
 To go and overlook his merchandise
 Beyond the seas, where he grew wondrous rich
 And left estates and moneys to the poor,
 And at his birthplace built a chapel, floored
 With marble which he sent from foreign lands.’ 

These thoughts, and many others of like sort,
 Passed quickly through the mind of Isabel,
 And her face brightened. The old man was glad,
 And thus resumed: ‘Well, Isabel, this scheme
 These two days has been meat and drink to me:
 Far more than we have lost is left us yet. 
We have enough – I wish indeed that I
 Were younger, but this hope is a good hope. 
Make ready Luke’s best garments; of the best
 Buy for him more, and let us send him forth
 Tomorrow, or the next day, or tonight –
 If he could go, the boy should go tonight!’ 

Here Michael ceased, and to the fields went forth
 With a light heart. The housewife for five days
 Was restless morn and night, and all day long
 Wrought on with her best fingers to prepare
 Things needful for the journey of her son. 
But Isabel was glad when Sunday came
 To stop her in her work; for when she lay
 By Michael’s side, she for the two last nights
 Heard him, how he was troubled in his sleep;
 And when they rose at morning she could see
 That all his hopes were gone. That day at noon
 She said to Luke, while they two by themselves
 Were sitting at the door: ‘Thou must not go,
 We have no other child but thee to lose,
 None to remember – do not go away,
 For if thou leave thy father he will die.’ 
The lad made answer with a jocund voice,
 And Isabel, when she had told her fears,
 Recovered heart. That evening her best fare
 Did she bring forth, and all together sat
 Like happy people round a Christmas fire. 

Next morning Isabel resumed her work,
 And all the ensuing week the house appeared
 As cheerful as a grove in spring. At length
 The expected letter from their kinsman came,
 With kind assurances that he would do
 His utmost for the welfare of the boy –
 To which requests were added that forthwith
 He might be sent to him. Ten times or more
 The letter was read over; Isabel
 Went forth to show it to the neighbours round;
 Nor was there at that time on English land
 A prouder heart than Luke’s. When Isabel
 Had to her house returned the old man said,
 ‘He shall depart tomorrow.’ To this word
 The housewife answered, talking much of things
 Which, if at such short notice he should go,
 Would surely be forgotten – but at length
 She gave consent, and Michael was at ease. 

Near the tumultuous brook of Greenhead Gill
 In that deep valley, Michael had designed
 To build a sheepfold, and before he heard
 The tidings of his melancholy loss
 For this same purpose he had gathered up
 A heap of stones, which close to the brook-side
 Lay thrown together, ready for the work. 
With Luke that evening thitherward he walked,
 And soon as they had reached the place he stopped,
 And thus the old man spake to him: ‘My son,
 Tomorrow thou wilt leave me. With full heart
 I look upon thee, for thou art the same
 That wert a promise to me ere thy birth,
 And all thy life hast been my daily joy. 
I will relate to thee some little part
 Of our two histories – ’twill do thee good
 When thou art from me, even if I should speak
 Of things thou canst not know of. 
After thou
 First camest into the world, as it befalls
 To newborn infants, thou didst sleep away
 Two days, and blessings from thy father’s tongue
 Then fell upon thee. Day by day passed on,
 And still I loved thee with increasing love. 
Never to living ear came sweeter sounds
 Than when I heard thee by our own fireside
 First uttering without words a natural tune –
 When thou, a feeding babe, didst in thy joy
 Sing at thy mother’s breast. Month followed month,
 And in the open fields my life was passed,
 And in the mountains, else I think that thou
 Hadst been brought up upon thy father’s knees! 
But we were playmates, Luke: among these hills,
 As well thou knowest, in us the old and young
 Have played together! – nor with me didst thou
 Lack any pleasure which a boy can know.’ 

Luke had a manly heart; but at these words
 He sobbed aloud. The old man grasped his hand,
 And said, ‘Nay, do not take it so – I see
 That these are things of which I need not speak. 
Even to the utmost have I been to thee
 A kind and a good father; and herein
 I but repay a gift which I myself
 Received at others’ hands, for though now old
 Beyond the common life of man I still
 Remember them who loved me in my youth. 
Both of them sleep together – here they lived
 As all their forefathers had done; and when
 At length their time was come, they were not loath
 To give their bodies to the family mould. 

I wished that thou shouldst live the life they lived;
 But ’tis a long time to look back, my son,
 And see so little gain from sixty years. 
These fields were burdened when they came to me:
 Till I was forty years of age, not more
 Than half of my inheritance was mine. 
I toiled and toiled – God blest me in my work,
 And till these three weeks past the land was free. 
It looks as if it never could endure
 Another master! Heaven forgive me, Luke,
 If I judge ill for thee, but it seems good
 That thou shouldst go.’ 
At this the old man paused,
 Then, pointing to the stones near which they stood,
 Thus after a short silence he resumed:
 ‘This was a work for us, and now, my son,
 It is a work for me! But, lay one stone –
 Here, lay it for me, Luke, with thine own hands –
 I for the purpose brought thee to this place. 
Nay, boy, be of good hope, we both may live
 To see a better day! At eighty-four
 I still am strong and stout: do thou thy part,
 I will do mine. I will begin again
 With many tasks that were resigned to thee:
 Up to the heights, and in among the storms,
 Will I without thee go again, and do
 All works which I was wont to do alone
 Before I knew thy face. 
Heaven bless thee,
 Thy heart these two weeks has been beating fast
 With many hopes. It should be so – yes, yes –
 I knew that thou couldst never have a wish
 To leave me, Luke. Thou hast been bound to me
 Only by links of love! When thou art gone
 What will be left to us? – but I forget
 My purposes. Lay now the corner-stone
 As I requested, and hereafter, Luke,
 When thou art gone away, should evil men
 Be thy companions, let this sheepfold be
 Thy anchor and thy shield. Amid all fear,
 And all temptation, let it be to thee
 An emblem of the life thy fathers lived,
 Who, being innocent, did for that cause
 Bestir them in good deeds. Now, fare thee well. 
When thou returnst, thou in this place wilt see
 A work which is not here. A covenant
 ’Twill be between us – but whatever fate
 Befall thee, I shall love thee to the last,
 And bear thy memory with me to the grave.’ 

The shepherd ended here, and Luke stooped down
 And, as his father had requested, laid
 The first stone of the sheepfold. At the sight
 The old man’s grief broke from him. To his heart
 He pressed his son; he kissed him and he wept,
 And to the house together they returned. 
Next morning, as had been resolved, the boy
 Began his journey; and when he had reached
 The public way he put on a bold face,
 And all the neighbours as he passed their doors
 Came forth with wishes and with farewell prayers
 That followed him till he was out of sight. 

A good report did from their kinsman come
 Of Luke and his well-doing; and the boy
 Wrote loving letters, full of wondrous news,
 Which, as the housewife phrased it, were throughout
 The prettiest letters that were ever seen! 
Both parents read them with rejoicing hearts. 
So many months passed on, and once again
 The shepherd went about his daily work
 With confident and cheerful thoughts; and now
 Sometimes when he could find a leisure hour
 He to that valley took his way, and there
 Wrought at the sheepfold. Meantime Luke began
 To slacken in his duty, and at length
 He in the dissolute city gave himself
 To evil courses. Ignominy and shame
 Fell on him, so that he was driven at last
 To seek a hiding-place beyond the seas. 

There is a comfort in the strength of love,
 ’Twill make a thing endurable which else
 Would break the heart – old Michael found it so. 
I have conversed with more than one who well
 Remember the old man, and what he was
 Years after he had heard this heavy news. 
His bodily frame had been from youth to age
 Of an unusual strength. Among the rocks
 He went, and still looked up upon the sun
 And listened to the wind, and, as before,
 Performed all kinds of labour for his sheep
 And for the land, his small inheritance. 
And to that hollow dell from time to time
 Did he repair, to build the fold of which
 His flock had need. ’Tis not forgotten yet
 The pity which was then in every heart
 For the old man, and ’tis believed by all
 That many and many a day he thither went,
 And never lifted up a single stone. 

There by the sheepfold sometimes was he seen
 Sitting alone, with that his faithful dog
 (Then old) beside him, lying at his feet. 
The length of full seven years from time to time
 He at the building of this sheepfold wrought,
 And left the work unfinished when he died. 
Three years, or little more, did Isabel
 Survive her husband; at her death the estate
 Was sold, and went into a stranger’s hand. 
The cottage which was named the Evening Star
 Is gone; the ploughshare has been through the ground
 On which it stood. Great changes have been wrought
 In all the neighbourhood; yet the oak is left
 That grew beside their door, and the remains
 Of the unfinished sheepfold may be seen
 Beside the boisterous brook of Greenhead Gill. 
