The New Creation, or the World of Imagination

You are the model and template,
 Pure beauty and heavenly delight. 
I saw you – and from this day on
 I can only see you in the world. 

Nature lay dead to my eye
 Deep dead she was to all feeling –
 Then came a breeze from above,
 Comanding light and love into the world. 

And light came, and life ignited,
 A soul flowed in the stiff mass;
 Every feeling thing now had a face,
 A voice that took to my heart. 

Through space new Heavens stretched
 And Earth was dressed anew
 And Education and Reason woke up,
 And Beauty arose smiling. 

My soul felt as if born from Heaven,
 Sprung from a lineage of Gods,
 Beholding the wonders of Nature,
 That Wisdom had never perceived. 

Not only greatness and vigour
 And splendour and space and movement;
 Not just the low-lying valley,
 Nor simply the height of the cliffs. 

But my ears caught the lively music,
 The harmony of the high Spheres;
 On the mountain rang out Angels’ harps,
 From the deep the dark spirits’ scream. 

The joys of peace smiled on the meadows,
 While Fear roamed the sombre valley,
 And the grove whispered of pleasures
 And the forest sighed of torments. 

And there was anger in the waves of the ocean
 And tenderness murmurs from the spring,
 And majesty in the flames of the sun,
 And modesty in the light of the moon. 

Revenge sharpened the arrows of lightning,
 Bravery shook the arm of the hurricane,
 And the cedar lifted its head upwards,
 And the flower opened its heart. –

Oh, living understanding of things! 
Oh! secret of emotion and reason! 
Who grasped you, Beauty? – none did –
 But only the one who can love. 

To me when you picture nature
 As Heavens of light and good,
 What are you? – refracted rays
 Of Hilma’s image in my soul. 

In my soul, it is only her imprint that
 Brings enchantment to Creation;
 And Earth is now a hallowed shrine
 Where she is the Divinity. 

You are the model and template,
 Pure beauty and heavenly delight. 
I saw you – and from this day on
 I can see only you in the world. 

In everything your essence returns,
 So unchanging, yet ever so new! 
Your growth was that of the lily,
 and hers the fresh gleam of your skin. 

Your gaze becomes one with the daylight,
 Your voice is the nightingale’s song,
 I breathe in you the fragrance of roses
 And you sway in the western wind. 

And yet more – you make joy out of dread,
 Abysses you fill up with light;
 You dress the deserts in blossom,
 Enchanting each stone of our ruins. 

Thus exalted, my thoughts swarm;
 Fleeing, eagerly searching,
 Searching through earth and heavens
 For the Creator of the blessed dust;

Asking in what guise to grasp
 The tender and good and joyful and mild one,
 What is worthy of our utmost reverence? –
 I now see him in the Image of you. 

In Halls of Kings, at Courts, in Towns,
 Among thousands I see only you;
 And when I enter a humble cabin,
 You are there already inside. 

I had set out to understand Wisdom;
 The thought of you tore me away. 
I set out to compose songs of Heroes;
 But the zither just taught your name. 

I wished to reach the heights of Repute,
 But I found myself in your footsteps. 
I wished to seek treasure and Fortune,
 And found them all in your gaze. 

You are the model and template,
 Pure beauty and heavenly delight. 
I saw you – and from this day on
 I can see only you in the world. 

Desperate, as you are hidden from sight,
 The thought of you is my sole reward:
 I have just the memory of your imprint,
 I can see only you in the world. 
