Csongor and Tünde

[extract from the ‘Soliloquy of the Night’]

Darkness and Void was all: myself alone
 seclusive, silent, all-forsaken Night,
 then light was born to me, my only child. 
As blazing light erupted from my womb
 the boundless power of the radiation
 perturbed the empty space, and from the Void
 an all-pervading thousand-headed monster,
 the Universe appeared. The moon, the stars,
 great wonders of the firmament, became
 lone pilgrims of immense trajectories. 
The former passive peace has passed away
 as matter moved and action came to power. 
Then barren space and time were populated,
 alive with action, movement everywhere. 
Ocean and earth fought desperately, claiming
 their heritance where Void had reigned before,
 until the oceans calmed their angry waves
 and as the fight let up, the waters brightened
 with sunny smiles reflected from the sky. 
Now, like a bride, in grace and gaiety
 young Earth put on her finery of flowers. 
The dust began to move, then came the beasts
 and lastly man, the animated clay,
 in kingly stile, to multiply his kind,
 the true, the false, the sinner and the saint. 
Darkness and Void remain: I’m here alone,
 a fugitive from daylight, gloomy Night. –
 An insect is the bubble of a moment,
 that’s all the time allowed for its existence. 
Its wings won’t save a bird, nor claws a beast,
 and noble, sturdy trees must all decay
 under the weight of passing centuries. 
As man arrives, his spirit radiates,
 the Universe is mirrored in his person. 
He looks around with infinite delight,
 reviewing raptly earth and firmament,
 but youth will soon desert him to decline
 to drowsy dotage, till his term is up,
 and then he’s gone, mere fly-speck, whence he came. 
Unquenchable desires drive him on
 to delve, to dream, discern and deeds to do,
 he hopes to launch immortal enterprises
 with mortal hands, and even in the grave
 memorials of vainness guard his dust,
 resplendent marble mountains mark the place
 with countless lurid, ostentatious signs,
 where intellect has paid homage to power. 
But what are homage, signs, memorials,
 when earth and oceans vanish into air? 
The tired suns desert their stable orbits
 collapsing into one vast cataclysm,
 the Universe decays and its ruins
 the melancholy twilight fades away. 
And it will end, as once it all began:
 Darkness and Void will be: myself alone,
 seclusive, silent, all-forsaken Night. 
