Crossing the Alps

[Prelude VI., ll. 494 – 572]

Upturning with a band
 Of travellers, from the Valais we had clomb
 Along the road that leads to Italy;
 A length of hours, making of these our guides
 Did we advance, and having reached an inn
 Among the mountains, we together ate
 Our noon’s repast, from which the travellers rose
 Leaving us at the board. Erelong we followed,
 Descending by the beaten road that led
 Right to a rivulet’s edge, and there broke off. 
The only track now visible was one
 Upon the further side, right opposite,
 And up a lofty mountain. This we took
 After a little scruple, and short pause,
 And climbed with eagerness, though not at length
 Without surprise and some anxiety
 On finding that we did not overtake
 Our comrades gone before. By fortunate chance,
 While every moment now increased our doubts,
 A peasant met us, and from him we learned
 That to the place which had perplexed us first
 We must descend, and there should find the road,
 Which in the stony channel of the stream
 Lay a few steps, and then along its banks –
 And further, that thenceforward all our course
 Was downwards with the current of that stream. 
Hard of belief, we questioned him again,
 And all the answers which the man returned
 To our inquiries – in their sense and substance,
 Translated by the feelings which we had –
 Ended in this, that we had crossed the Alps! 

Imagination – lifting up itself
 Before the eye and progress of my song
 Like an unfathered vapour, here that power,
 In all the might of its endowments, came
 Athwart me! I was lost as in a cloud,
 Halted without a struggle to break through;
 And now, recovering, to my soul I say
 ‘I recognize thy glory.’ In such strength
 Of usurpation, in such visitings
 Of awful promise, when the light of sense
 Goes out in flashes that have shown to us
 The invisible world, does greatness make abode –
 There harbours whether we be young or old. 
Our destiny, our nature, and our home,
 Is with infinitude, and only there –
 With hope it is, hope that can never die,
 Effort, and expectation, and desire,
 And something evermore about to be. 
The mind beneath such banners militant
 Thinks not of spoils or trophies, nor of aught
 That may attest its prowess, blest in thoughts
 That are their own perfection and reward –
 Strong in itself, and in the access of joy
 Which hides it like the overflowing Nile. 

The dull and heavy slackening which ensued
 Upon those tidings by the peasant given
 Was soon dislodged. Downwards we hurried fast,
 And entered with the road which we had missed
 Into a narrow chasm. The brook and road
 Were fellow-travellers in this gloomy pass,
 And with them did we journey several hours
 At a slow step. The immeasurable height
 Of woods decaying, never to be decayed,
 The stationary blasts of waterfalls,
 And everywhere along the hollow rent
 Winds thwarting winds, bewildered and forlorn,
 The torrents shooting from the clear blue sky,
 The rocks that muttered close upon our ears,
 Black drizzling crags that spake by the wayside
 As if a voice were in them, the sick sight
 And giddy prospect of the raving stream,
 The unfettered clouds and region of the heavens,
 Tumult and peace, the darkness and the light –
 Were all like workings of one mind, the features
 Of the same face, blossoms upon one tree,
 Characters of the great apocalypse,
 The types and symbols of eternity,
 Of first, and last, and midst, and without end. 
