Dejection,

An Ode

I.

Well, if the bard was weather-wise, who made
 The grand old ballad of Sir Patrick Spens,
 This night, so tranquil now, will not go hence
 Unroused by winds, that ply a busier trade
 Than those which mould yon cloud in lazy flakes,
 Or the dull sobbing draught, that drones and rakes
 Upon the strings of this Eolian lute,
 Which better far were mute. 
For lo! the new moon, winter-bright
 And overspread with phantom light –
 With swimming phantom light o’erspread,
 But rimmed and circled by a silver thread –
 I see the old moon in her lap, foretelling
 The coming-on of rain and squally blast. 
And oh, that even now the gust were swelling,
 And the slant night-shower driving loud and fast! 
Those sounds which oft have raised me, while they awed,
 And sent my soul abroad,
 Might now perhaps their wonted impulse give,
 Might startle this dull pain, and make it move and live! 

II.

A grief without a pang, void, dark, and drear,
 A stifled, drowsy, unimpassioned grief,
 Which finds no natural outlet, no relief,
 In word, or sigh, or tear –
 Oh Edmund, in this wan and heartless mood,
 To other thoughts by yonder throstle wooed,
 All this long eve, so balmy and serene,
 Have I been gazing on the western sky,
 And its peculiar tint of yellow-green –
 And still I gaze – and with how blank an eye! 
And those thin clouds above, in flakes and bars,
 That give away their motion to the stars;
 Those stars, that glide behind them or between,
 Now sparkling, now bedimmed, but always seen;
 Yon crescent moon, as fixed as if it grew
 In its own cloudless, starless lake of blue –
 A boat becalmed, a lovely sky-canoe! 
I see them all, so excellently fair,
 I see, not feel, how beautiful they are! 

III.

My genial spirits fail;
 And what can these avail
 To lift the smothering weight from off my breast? 
It were a vain endeavour,
 Though I should gaze for ever
 On that green light that lingers in the west:
 I may not hope from outward forms to win
 The passion and the life, whose fountains are within. 

IV.

Oh Edmund, we receive but what we give,
 And in our life alone does Nature live:
 Ours is her wedding garment, ours her shroud! 
And would we aught behold of higher worth
 Than that inanimate cold world allowed
 To the poor loveless ever-anxious crowd,
 Ah! from the soul itself must issue forth
 A light, a glory, a fair luminous cloud
 Enveloping the earth –
 And from the soul itself must there be sent
 A sweet and potent voice, of its own birth,
 Of all sweet sounds the life and element. 

Oh pure of heart, thou needst not ask of me
 What this strong music in the soul may be –
 What, and wherein it doth exist,
 This light, this glory, this fair luminous mist,
 This beautiful and beauty-making power. 
Joy, virtuous Edmund – joy that ne’er was given,
 Save to the pure, and in their purest hour –
 Joy, Edmund, is the spirit and the power
 Which, wedding Nature to us, gives in dower
 A new Earth and new Heaven,
 Undreamt of by the sensual and the proud! 
Joy is the sweet voice, joy the luminous cloud –
 We, we ourselves, rejoice! 
And thence flows all that charms or ear or sight –
 All melodies the echoes of that voice,
 All colours a suffusion from that light. 

V.

Yes, dearest Edmund, yes,
 There was a time when, though my path was rough,
 This joy within me dallied with distress,
 And all misfortunes were but as the stuff
 Whence fancy made me dreams of happiness;
 For hope grew round me like the twining vine,
 And fruits and foliage not my own, seemed mine! 
But now afflictions bow me down to earth –
 Nor care I that they rob me of my mirth,
 But oh, each visitation
 Suspends what Nature gave me at my birth,
 My shaping spirit of imagination! 

VI.

Oh, wherefore did I let it haunt my mind,
 This dark distressful dream? 
I turn from it and listen to the wind,
 Which long has raved unnoticed. What a scream
 Of agony, by torture lengthened out,
 That lute sent forth! Thou wind, that ravest without! 
Bare crag, or mountain-tairn, or blasted tree,
 Or pine-grove whither woodman never clomb,
 Or lonely house, long held the witches’ home,
 Methinks were fitter instruments for thee,
 Mad lutanist, who in this month of showers,
 Of dark-brown gardens, and of peeping flowers,
 Makest devils’ yule, with worse than wintry song
 The blossoms, buds, and timorous leaves among. 
Thou actor, perfect in all tragic sounds! 
Thou mighty poet, even to frenzy bold! 
What tellest thou now about? 
’Tis of the rushing of an host in rout,
 With many groans of men with smarting wounds –
 At once they groan with pain, and shudder with the cold! 
But hush, there is a pause of deepest silence! 
And all that noise, as of a rushing crowd,
 With groans and tremulous shudderings – all is over! 
It tells another tale, with sounds less deep and loud,
 A tale of less affright
 And tempered with delight,
 As Edmund’s self had framed the tender lay. 
’Tis of a little child
 Upon a lonesome wild
 Not far from home, but she has lost her way
 And now moans low in utter grief and fear,
 And now screams loud, and hopes to make her mother hear! 

VII.

’Tis midnight, and small thoughts have I of sleep –
 Full seldom may my friend such vigils keep! 
Visit him, gentle sleep, with wings of healing,
 And may this storm be but a mountain-birth,
 May all the stars hang bright above his dwelling,
 Silent as though they watched the sleeping Earth! 
With light heart may he rise,
 Gay fancy, cheerful eyes,
 And sing his lofty song, and teach me to rejoice! 
Oh Edmund, friend of my devoutest choice,
 Oh, raised from anxious dread and busy care
 By the immenseness of the good and fair
 Which thou seest everywhere –
 Joy lifts thy spirit, joy attunes thy voice;
 To thee do all things live, from pole to pole,
 Their life the eddying of thy living soul! 
Oh simple spirit, guided from above;
 Oh lofty poet, full of light and love;
 Brother and friend of my devoutest of my choice,
 Thus mayst thou ever, evermore rejoice! 
