Coombe Ellen

[Ll. 1-19, 36-56, 76-90]

Call the strange spirit that abides unseen
 In wilds and wastes and shaggy solitudes,
 And bid his dim hand lead thee through these scenes
 That burst immense around – by mountains, glens,
 And solitary cataracts that dash
 Through dark ravines, and trees whose wreathéd roots
 O’erhang the torrent’s channelled course, and streams
 That far below, along the narrow vale,
 Upon their rocky way wind musical! 

Stranger, if Nature charm thee – if thou lovest
 To trace her awful steps, in glade or glen,
 Or under covert of the rocking wood
 That sways its murmuring and mossy boughs
 Above thy head – now, when the wind at times
 Stirs its deep silence round thee, and the shower
 Falls on the sighing foliage, hail her here
 In these her haunts, and, wrapt in musings high,
 Think that thou holdest converse with some power
 Invisible and strange. 

Here Melancholy, on the pale crags laid,
 Might muse herself to sleep; or Fancy come,
 Witching the mind with tender cozenage,
 And shaping things that are not – here all day
 Might Meditation listen to the lapse
 Of the white waters flashing through the cleft,
 And, gazing on the many shadowing trees,
 Mingle a pensive moral as she gazed. 

High o’er thy head, amidst the shivered slate,
 Behold (a sapling yet) the wild ash bend,
 Its dark red berries clustering, as if it wished
 In the clear liquid mirror, ere it fell,
 To trace its beauties. O’er the prone cascade,
 Airy, and light, and elegant, the birch
 Displays its glossy stem amidst the gloom
 Of alders and jagg’d fern, and evermore
 Waves her light pensile foliage, as she wooed
 The passing gale to whisper flatteries! 
Upon the adverse bank, withered, and stripped
 Of all its pleasant leaves, a scathed oak
 Hangs desolate. 

Now wind we up the glen, and hear below
 The dashing torrent, in deep woods concealed –
 And now, again, white water flashing on the view
 O’er the huge craggy fragments! Ancient stream,
 That murmurest through the mountain-solitudes,
 The time has been when no eye marked thy course
 Save his who made the world. Fancy might dream
 She saw thee thus bound on from age to age
 Unseen of man, whilst awful Nature sat
 On the rent rocks, and said: ‘These haunts be mine!’ 
Now Taste has marked thy features, here and there
 Touching with tender hand, but injuring not,
 Thy beauties – whilst along thy woody verge
 Ascends the winding pathway, and the eye
 Catches at intervals thy varied falls. 
