The Young Captive

“Spared by the scythe, the newborn grainstalk ripens;
Fearless of the winepress, the summer vineyard
Drinks the sweet gifts of dawn’s sky;
And I, fair like one, and like the other young,
Whatever griefs the present hour may bring,
I do not yet want to die.

Let the dry-eyed stoic hasten to his death:
Myself, I weep and hope. At the north’s black breath
I bow, and raise my head again.
If there are bitter days, others are so sweet!
Alas, what honey never sickens someone?
What ocean has no hurricane?

Inventive illusion dwells within my breast.
On me the walls of prison weigh in vain:
I have hope’s resilient wings.
Escaped from the nets of the cruel bird-catcher,
Livelier, happier, to fields of heaven
Philomena soars and sings.

Is it for me to die? I go to sleep at peace
And wake at peace; and neither waking nor asleep
Am I a prey to remorse.
My welcome to the day gives all eyes laughter;
On downcast brows, my aspect in these places
Causes spirits to rejoice.

My lovely voyage has still so far to go!
I set out, and of the elms that line the road
I have scarcely passed the first;
The banquet of life I have scarcely begun;
Only an instant have I held to my lips
A full cup to quench my thirst.

This is my spring, I want to see the harvest,
And like the sun, from season round to season,
I want my year to finish.
A brilliant bloom, the glory of the garden,
I have only seen shine the fires of morning;
I want my day to finish.

O death, you can wait! Stand farther, farther off;
Go comfort hearts that shame or fear devours,
Or gray despair drinks dry.
Pales still has for me her green asylums,
Loves have their kisses, Muses have their concerts,
I do not yet want to die.”

Thus, though sad and captive too, I woke my lyre
On hearing these complaints, this voice, these wishes
Of a captive girl, still young,
Shook off the burden of my languishing days,
And bent the sounds of her sweet and artless lips
To the gentle laws of song.

These verses, my prison’s tuneful witnesses,
Will make some readers seek to know this beauty
Who in these lines may hear her.
Grace adorned her features and the way she spoke,
And they, like her, will fear to see their days cut short
Who pass them near her.
