The Bride’s Tragedy

[Act II., scene iv.]

Hesperus

Who speaks? Who whispers there? A light! A light! 
I’ll search the room! Something hath called me thrice
 With a low muttering voice of toadish hisses –
 And thrice I slept again. But still it came
 Nearer and nearer – plucked my mantle from me,
 And made mine heart an ear, in which it poured
 Its loathed enticing courtship. Ho! A light! 
Thou drowsy snail, thy footsteps are asleep –
 Hold up thy torch! 

Attendant

My lord, you are disturbed. 
Have you seen aught? 

Hesperus

I lay upon my bed,
 And something in the air, out-jetting night,
 Converting feeling to intenser vision,
 Featured its ghastly self upon my soul
 Deeper than night. 

Attendant

This is delusion surely! 
She’s busy with men’s thoughts at all night hours;
 And to the waking subtle apprehension
 The darkling chamber’s still and sleepy air
 Hath breath and motion oft. 

Hesperus

Lift up the hangings, mark the doors, the corners –
 Seest nothing yet? No face of fiendlike mirth
 More frightful than the fixed and doggish grin
 Of a dead madman? 

Attendant

Nought I see, my lord,
 Save the long, varied crowd of warlike shapes
 Set in the stitched picture. 

Hesperus

Heard ye then? 
There was a sound, as though some marble tongue
 Moved on its rusty hinge, syllabling harshly
 The hoarse death-rattle into speech. 

Attendant

The wind is high, and through the silent rooms
 Murmurs his burden, to an heedless ear
 Almost articulate. 

Hesperus

Thou sleepest, fool! 
A voice has been at my bedside tonight
 Its breath is burning on my forehead still –
 Still o’er my brain its accents, wildly sweet,
 Hover and fall. Away, and dream again! 
I’ll watch, myself. 
Aye, these are living colours:
 Those cheeks have worn their youth these hundred years,
 Those flowers are verdant in their worsted spring,
 And blooming still –
 While she, whose needle limned so cunningly,
 Sleeps and dreams not. It is a goodly state,
 And there is one I wish had ta’en her bed
 In the stone dormitory. 
Blindfold moth! 
Thou shalt not burn thy life – there, I have saved thee –
 If thou art grateful, mingle with the air
 That feeds the lips of her I thought of once –
 Choke her, moth, choke her! I could be content
 If she were safe in Heaven. 
Yon stout dagger
 Is fairly fashioned for a blade of stitches,
 And shines, methinks, most grimly! Well, thou art
 An useful tool sometimes – thy tooth works quickly,
 And if thou gnawest a secret from the heart,
 Thou tellest it not again! Ha, the feigned steel
 Doth blush and steam: there is a snuff of blood! 
Who placed this iron aspic in my hand? 
Speak – who is at my ear? 
I know thee now,
 I know the hideous laughter of thy face! 
’Tis Malice’s eldest imp – the heir of Hell,
 Red-handed Murder. Slow it whispers me,
 Coaxingly with serpent voice. Well sung,
 Syren of Acheron! 
I’ll not look on thee –
 Why does thy frantic weapon dig the air
 With such most frightful vehemence? Back! Back! 
Tell the dark grave I will not give it food ... 
