Ode to Fanny

Physician Nature, let my spirit blood! 
Oh ease my heart of verse and let me rest –
 Throw me upon thy tripod till the flood
 Of stifling numbers ebbs from my full breast! 
A theme, a theme – great Nature, give a theme! 
Let me begin my dream:
 I come. I see thee, as thou standest there,
 Beckon me out into the wintry air. 

Ah dearest love, sweet home of all my fears
 And hopes, and joys, and panting miseries,
 Tonight (if I may guess) thy beauty wears
 A smile of such delight,
 As brilliant and bright,
 As when, with ravished, aching, vassal eyes,
 Lost in soft amaze
 I gaze, I gaze! 

Who now, with greedy looks, eats up my feast? 
What stare outfaces now my silver moon? 
Ah, keep that hand unravished at the least
 Let, let, the amorous burn,
 But prithee do not turn
 The current of your heart from me so soon! 
Oh, save (in charity)
 The quickest pulse for me! 

Save it for me, sweet love! Though music breathe
 Voluptuous visions into the warm air,
 Though swimming through the dance’s dangerous wreath,
 Be like an April day,
 Smiling and cold and gay –
 A temperate lily, temperate as fair,
 Then Heaven, there will be
 A warmer June for me! 

‘Why, this’, you’ll say, my Fanny, ‘is not true!’ 
Put your soft hand upon your snowy side
 Where the heart beats – confess, ’tis nothing new! 
Must not a woman be
 A feather on the sea,
 Swayed to and fro by every wind and tide? 
Of as uncertain speed
 As blow-ball from the mead? 

I know it – and to know it is despair
 To one who loves you as I love, sweet Fanny,
 Whose heart goes fluttering for you everywhere,
 Nor, when away you roam,
 Dare keep its wretched home! 
Love, love alone, has pains severe and many –
 Then, loveliest, keep me free
 From torturing jealousy! 

Ah, if you prize my subdued soul above
 The poor, the fading, brief pride of an hour,
 Let none profane my Holy See of love,
 Or with a rude hand break
 The sacramental cake –
 Let none else touch the just new-budded flower! 
If not, may my eyes close,
 Love, on their last repose. 
