Arabella Stuart

I.

’Twas but a dream! – I saw the stag leap free
 Under the boughs where early birds were singing,
 I stood o’ershadowed by the greenwood-tree,
 And heard, it seemed, a sudden bugle ringing
 Far through a royal forest: then the fawn
 Shot, like a gleam of light, from grassy lawn
 To secret covert; and the smooth turf shook
 And lilies quivered by the glade’s lone brook,
 And young leaves trembled, as, in fleet career,
 A princely band, with horn, and hound, and spear,
 Like a rich masque swept forth. I saw the dance
 Of their white plumes, that bore a silvery glance
 Into the deep wood’s heart; and all passed by,
 Save one – I met the smile of one clear eye,
 Flashing out joy to mine. Yes, thou wert there. 
Seymour, a soft wind blew the clustering hair
 Back from thy gallant brow, as thou didst rein
 Thy courser, turning from that gorgeous train,
 And fling, methought, thy hunting-spear away,
 And, lightly graceful in thy green array,
 Bound to my side; and we, that met and parted,
 Ever in dread of some dark watchful power,
 Won back to childhood’s trust, and fearless-hearted,
 Blent the glad fullness of our thoughts that hour,
 Even like the mingling of sweet streams, beneath
 Dim woven leaves, and midst the floating breath
 Of hidden forest-flowers. 

II.

’Tis past! – I wake,
 A captive, and alone, and far from thee,
 My love and friend – yet fostering for thy sake
 A quenchless hope of happiness to be,
 And feeling still my woman-spirit strong,
 In the deep faith which lifts from earthly wrong
 A Heavenward glance. I know, I know our love
 Shall yet call gentle angels from above,
 By its undying fervour, and prevail –
 Sending a breath, as of the spring’s first gale,
 Through hearts now cold; and, raising its bright face
 With a free gush of sunny tears, erase
 The characters of anguish. In this trust
 I bear, I strive, I bow not to the dust,
 That I may bring thee back no faded form,
 No bosom chilled and blighted by the storm,
 But all my youth’s first treasures, when we meet,
 Making past sorrow, by communion, sweet. 

III.

And thou too art in bonds! – yet droop thou not,
 Oh my beloved – there is one hopeless lot,
 But one, and that not ours. Beside the dead
 There sits the grief that mantles up its head,
 Loathing the laughter and proud pomp of light,
 When darkness, from the vainly doting sight
 Covers its beautiful! If thou wert gone
 To the grave’s bosom, with thy radiant brow;
 If thy deep-thrilling voice, with that low tone
 Of earnest tenderness, which now, even now
 Seems floating through my soul, were music taken
 For ever from this world – oh! thus forsaken,
 Could I bear on? Thou livest, thou livest, thou’rt mine! 
With this glad thought I make my heart a shrine,
 And by the lamp which quenchless there shall burn,
 Sit a lone watcher for the day’s return. 

IV.

And lo, the joy that cometh with the morning,
 Brightly victorious o’er the hours of care! 
I have not watched in vain, serenely scorning
 The wild and busy whispers of despair! 
Thou hast sent tidings, as of Heaven – I wait
 The hour, the sign, for blessed flight to thee. 
Oh for the skylark’s wing that seeks its mate
 As a star shoots! – but on the breezy sea
 We shall meet soon. To think of such an hour! 
Will not my heart, o’erburdened by its bliss,
 Faint and give way within me, as a flower
 Borne down and perishing by noontide’s kiss? 
Yet shall I fear that lot – the perfect rest,
 The full deep joy of dying on thy breast,
 After long suffering won? So rich a close
 Too seldom crowns with peace affection’s woes. 

V.

Sunset! – I tell each moment – from the skies
 The last red splendour floats along my wall,
 Like a king’s banner! Now it melts, it dies! 
I see one star – I hear – ’twas not the call,
 The expected voice; my quick heart throbbed too soon. 
I must keep vigil till yon rising moon
 Shower down less golden light. Beneath her beam
 Through my lone lattice poured, I sit and dream
 Of summer-lands afar, where holy love,
 Under the vine or in the citron grove,
 May breathe from terror. 
Now the night grows deep,
 And silent as its clouds, and full of sleep. 
I hear my veins beat. Hark! a bell’s slow chime! 
My heart strikes with it. Yet again – ’tis time! 
A step! – a voice! – or but a rising breeze? 
Hark! – haste! – I come, to meet thee on the seas. 

VI.

Now never more, oh! never, in the worth
 Of its pure cause, let sorrowing love on earth
 Trust fondly – never more! The hope is crushed
 That lit my life, the voice within me hushed
 That spoke sweet oracles; and I return
 To lay my youth, as in a burial urn,
 Where sunshine may not find it. All is lost! 
No tempest met our barks – no billow tossed –
 Yet were they severed, even as we must be,
 That so have loved, so striven our hearts to free
 From their close-coiling fate! In vain – in vain! 
The dark links meet, and clasp themselves again,
 And press out life. Upon the deck I stood,
 And a white sail came gliding o’er the flood,
 Like some proud bird of ocean; then mine eye
 Strained out, one moment earlier to descry
 The form it ached for, and the bark’s career
 Seemed slow to that fond yearning. It drew near,
 Fraught with our foes! What boots it to recall
 The strife, the tears? Once more a prison-wall
 Shuts the green hills and woodlands from my sight,
 And joyous glance of waters to the light,
 And thee, my Seymour, thee! 
I will not sink! 
Thou, thou hast rent the heavy chain that bound thee! 
And this shall be my strength – the joy to think
 That thou mayst wander with heaven’s breath around thee,
 And all the laughing sky! This thought shall yet
 Shine o’er my heart a radiant amulet,
 Guarding it from despair. Thy bonds are broken,
 And unto me, I know, thy true love’s token
 Shall one day be deliverance, though the years
 Lie dim between, o’erhung with mists of tears. 

VII.

My friend! my friend! where art thou? Day by day,
 Gliding like some dark mournful stream away,
 My silent youth flows from me. Spring, the while,
 Comes and rains beauty on the kindling boughs
 Round hall and hamlet; Summer with her smile,
 Fills the green forest; young hearts breathe their vows;
 Brothers long parted meet; fair children rise
 Round the glad board; Hope laughs from loving eyes –
 All this is in the world! These joys lie sown,
 The dew of every path. On one alone
 Their freshness may not fall – the stricken deer
 Dying of thirst with all the waters near. 

VIII.

Ye are (from dingle and fresh glade) ye flowers
 By some kind hand to cheer my dungeon sent;
 O’er you the oak shed down the summer showers,
 And the lark’s nest was where your bright cups bent,
 Quivering to breeze and raindrop, like the sheen
 Of twilight stars. On you heaven’s eye hath been,
 Through the leaves, pouring its dark sultry blue
 Into your glowing hearts; the bee to you
 Hath murmured, and the rill. My soul grows faint
 With passionate yearning, as its quick dreams paint
 Your haunts by dell and stream – the green, the free,
 The full of all sweet sound – the shut from me! 

IX.

There went a swift bird singing past my cell –
 Oh love and freedom, ye are lovely things! 
With you the peasant on the hills may dwell,
 And by the streams; but I – the blood of kings,
 A proud unmingling river, through my veins
 Flows in lone brightness, and its gifts are chains! 
Kings! – I had silent visions of deep bliss,
 Leaving their thrones far distant, and for this
 I am cast under their triumphal car,
 An insect to be crushed! Oh! Heaven is far –
 Earth pitiless! 

Dost thou forget me, Seymour? I am proved
 So long, so sternly! Seymour, my beloved! 
There are such tales of holy marvels done
 By strong affection, of deliverance won
 Through its prevailing power! Are these things told
 Till the young weep with rapture, and the old
 Wonder, yet dare not doubt; and thou! oh, thou! 
Dost thou forget me in my hope’s decay? –
 Thou canst not! – through the silent night, even now,
 I, that need prayer so much, awake and pray
 Still first for thee. Oh gentle, gentle friend! 
How shall I bear this anguish to the end? 

Aid! – comes there yet no aid? The voice of blood
 Passes Heaven’s gate, even ere the crimson flood
 Sinks through the greensward! Is there not a cry
 From the wrung heart, of power, through agony,
 To pierce the clouds? Hear, Mercy! – hear me! None
 That bleed and weep beneath the smiling sun
 Have heavier cause! – yet hear! – my soul grows dark –
 Who hears the last shriek from the sinking bark
 On the mid-seas, and with the storm alone,
 And bearing to the abyss, unseen, unknown,
 Its freight of human hearts? The o’ermastering wave –
 Who shall tell how it rushed – and none to save? 

Thou hast forsaken me! I feel, I know,
 There would be rescue if this were not so. 
Thou’rt at the chase, thou’rt at the festive board,
 Thou’rt where the red wine free and high is poured,
 Thou’rt where the dancers meet! – a magic glass
 Is set within my soul, and proud shapes pass,
 Flushing it o’er with pomp from bower and hall;
 I see one shadow, stateliest there of all –
 Thine! What dost thou amidst the bright and fair,
 Whispering light words, and mocking my despair? 
It is not well of thee! My love was more
 Than fiery song may breathe, deep thought explore –
 And there thou smilest, while my heart is dying,
 With all its blighted hopes around it lying;
 Even thou, on whom they hung their last green leaf. 
Yet smile, smile on! Too bright art thou for grief. 

Death – what? Is death a locked and treasured thing,
 Guarded by swords of fire – a hidden spring,
 A fabled fruit – that I should thus endure,
 As if the world within me held no cure? 
Wherefore not spread free wings? Heaven, Heaven control
 These thoughts – they rush – I look into my soul
 As down a gulf, and tremble at the array
 Of fierce forms crowding it! Give strength to pray,
 So shall their dark host pass. 

The storm is stilled. 
Father in Heaven! thou, only thou, canst sound
 The heart’s great deep, with floods of anguish filled,
 For human line too fearfully profound. 
Therefore forgive, my Father! if thy child,
 Rocked on its heaving darkness, hath grown wild
 And sinned in her despair! It well may be,
 That thou wouldst lead my spirit back to thee –
 By the crushed hope too long on this world poured,
 The stricken love which hath perchance adored
 A mortal in thy place! Now let me strive
 With thy strong arm no more! Forgive, forgive! 
Take me to peace! 

And peace at last is nigh. 
A sign is on my brow, a token sent
 The o’erwearied dust from home; no breeze flits by
 But calls me with a strange sweet whisper, blent
 Of many mysteries. 

Hark! the warning tone
 Deepens – its word is Death! Alone, alone,
 And sad in youth, but chastened, I depart,
 Bowing to Heaven. Yet, yet my woman’s heart
 Shall wake a spirit and a power to bless,
 Even in this hour’s o’ershadowing fearfulness,
 Thee, its first love! Oh! tender still, and true –
 Be it forgotten if mine anguish threw
 Drops from its bitter fountain on thy name,
 Though but a moment. 

Now, with fainting frame,
 With soul just lingering on the flight begun,
 To bind for thee its last dim thoughts in one,
 I bless thee! Peace be on thy noble head,
 Years of bright fame, when I am with the dead! 
I bid this prayer survive me, and retain
 Its might, again to bless thee, and again! 
Thou hast been gathered into my dark fate
 Too much; too long, for my sake, desolate
 Hath been thine exiled youth; but now take back,
 From dying hands, thy freedom, and retrack
 (After a few kind tears for her whose days
 Went out in dreams of thee) the sunny ways
 Of hope, and find thou happiness! Yet send,
 Even then, in silent hours, a thought, dear friend! 
Down to my voiceless chamber; for thy love
 Hath been to me all gifts of earth above,
 Though bought with burning tears! It is the sting
 Of death to leave that vainly-precious thing
 In this cold world! What were it then, if thou,
 With thy fond eyes, wert gazing on me now? 
Too keen a pang! Farewell! and yet once more,
 Farewell! – the passion of long years I pour
 Into that word. Thou hearest not, but the woe
 And fervour of its tones may one day flow
 To thy heart’s holy place – there let them dwell. 
We shall o’ersweep the grave to meet – Farewell! 
