Sappho and Phaon

[Sonnets I-XV, XXXV-XLIV]

To The Reader



Sonnet Introductory

Favoured by Heaven are those, ordained to taste
 The bliss supreme that kindles fancy’s fire;
 Whose magic fingers sweep the muse’s lyre
 In varying cadence, eloquently chaste! 
Well may the mind, with tuneful numbers graced,
 To fame’s immortal attributes aspire,
 Above the treacherous spells of low desire
 That wound the sense, by vulgar joys debased. 
For thou, blest Poesy, with godlike powers
 To calm the miseries of man, wert given;
 When passion rends, and hopeless love devours,
 By memory goaded and by frenzy driven,
 ’Tis thine to guide him midst Elysian bowers
 And show his fainting soul – a glimpse of Heaven. 

Sonnet II. — The Temple of Chastity

High on a rock, coëval with the skies,
 A temple stands, reared by immortal powers
 To chastity divine! Ambrosial flowers,
 Twining round icicles, in columns rise,
 Mingling with pendent gems of orient dyes! 
Piercing the air, a golden crescent towers,
 Veiled by transparent clouds; while smiling Hours
 Shake from their varying wings – celestial joys! 
The steps of spotless marble, scattered o’er
 With deathless roses, armed with many a thorn,
 Lead to the altar. On the frozen floor,
 Studded with tear-drops petrified by scorn,
 Pale vestals kneel the goddess to adore,
 While Love, his arrows broke, retires forlorn. 

Sonnet III. — The Bower of Pleasure

Turn to yon vale beneath, whose tangled shade
 Excludes the blazing torch of noonday light:
 Where sportive fawns and dimpled loves invite,
 The bower of pleasure opens to the glade. 
Lulled by soft flutes, on leaves of violets laid,
 There witching beauty greets the ravished sight,
 More gentle than the arbitress of night
 In all her silvery panoply arrayed! 
The birds breathe bliss, light zephyrs kiss the ground
 Stealing the hyacinth’s divine perfume;
 While from pellucid fountains glittering round,
 Small tinkling rills bid rival flowerets bloom! 
Here, laughing cupids bathe the bosom’s wound;
 There, tyrant passion finds a glorious tomb! 

Sonnet IV. — Sappho Discovers her Passion

Why, when I gaze on Phaon’s beauteous eyes,
 Why does each thought in wild disorder stray? 
Why does each fainting faculty decay,
 And my chilled breast in throbbing tumults rise? 
Mute on the ground my lyre neglected lies,
 The Muse forgot, and lost the melting lay;
 My down-cast looks, my faltering lips, betray
 That stung by hopeless passion Sappho dies! 
Now on a bank of cypress let me rest –
 Come, tuneful maids, ye pupils of my care,
 Come, with your dulcet numbers sooth my breast,
 And, as the soft vibrations float on air,
 Let pity waft my spirit to the blest,
 To mock the barbarous triumphs of despair! 

Sonnet V. — Condemns its Power

Oh how can love exulting reason quell? 
How fades each nobler passion from his gaze –
 E’en fame, that cherishes the poet’s lays,
 That fame ill-fated Sappho loved so well? 
Lost is the wretch, who in his fatal spell
 Wastes the short summer of delicious days,
 And from the tranquil path of wisdom strays
 In passion’s thorny wild forlorn to dwell. 
Oh ye who in that sacred temple smile
 Where holy innocence resides enshrined,
 Who fear not sorrow, and who know not guile
 (Each thought composed, and every wish resigned),
 Tempt not the path where pleasure’s flowery wile
 In sweet, but poisonous, fetters holds the mind. 

Sonnet VI. — Describes the Characteristics of Love

Is it to love, to fix the tender gaze,
 To hide the timid blush, and steal away –
 To shun the busy world, and waste the day
 In some rude mountain’s solitary maze? 
Is it to chant one name in ceaseless lays,
 To hear no words that other tongues can say,
 To watch the pale moon’s melancholy ray,
 To chide in fondness, and in folly praise? 
Is it to pour the involuntary sigh,
 To dream of bliss, and wake new pangs to prove –
 To talk, in fancy, with the speaking eye,
 Then start with jealousy, and wildly rove? 
Is it to loath the light, and wish to die? 
For these I feel – and feel that they are love. 

Sonnet VII. — Invokes Reason

Come, Reason, come! Each nerve rebellious bind,
 Lull the fierce tempest of my feverish soul –
 Come, with the magic of thy meek control,
 And check the wayward wanderings of my mind:
 Estranged from thee, no solace can I find. 
O’er my rapt brain, where pensive visions stole,
 Now Passion reigns and stormy tumults roll:
 So the smooth sea obeys the furious wind! 
In vain, Philosophy unfolds her store –
 O’erwhelmed is every source of pure delight;
 Dim is the golden page of Wisdom’s lore;
 All nature fades before my sickening sight:
 For what bright scene can fancy’s eye explore
 Midst dreary labyrinths of mental night? 

Sonnet VIII. — Her Passion Increases

Why, through each aching vein, with lazy pace
 Thus steals the languid fountain of my heart,
 While from its source each wild convulsive start
 Tears the scorched roses from my burning face? 
In vain, oh Lesbian vales, your charms I trace –
 Vain is the poet’s theme, the sculptor’s art! 
No more the lyre its magic can impart,
 Though waked to sound with more than mortal grace. 
Go, tuneful maids, go bid my Phaon prove
 That passion mocks the empty boast of fame –
 Tell him no joys are sweet, but joys of love,
 Melting the soul, and thrilling all the frame! 
Oh may the ecstatic thought his bosom move,
 And sighs of rapture fan the blush of shame! 

Sonnet IX. — Laments the Volatility of Phaon

Ye, who in alleys green and leafy bowers
 Sport, the rude children of fantastic birth;
 Where frolic nymphs, and shaggy tribes of mirth,
 In clamorous revels waste the midnight hours –
 Who, linked in flaunting bands of mountain-flowers,
 Weave your wild mazes o’er the dewy earth,
 Ere the fierce lord of lustre rushes forth
 And o’er the world his beamy radiance pours! 
Oft has your clanking cymbal’s maddening strain,
 Loud-ringing through the torch-illumined grove,
 Lured my loved Phaon from the youthful train,
 Through rugged dells, o’er craggy rocks to rove –
 Then how can she his vagrant heart detain,
 Whose lyre throbs only to the touch of love? 

Sonnet X. — Describes Phaon

Dangerous to hear is that melodious tongue,
 And fatal to the sense those murderous eyes,
 Where in a sapphire sheath love’s arrow lies,
 Himself concealed the crystal haunts among! 
Oft o’er that form, enamoured, have I hung,
 On that smooth cheek to mark the deepening dyes,
 While from that lip the fragrant breath would rise,
 That lip, like Cupid’s bow, with rubies strung! 
Still let me gaze upon that polished brow,
 O’er which the golden hair luxuriant plays;
 So, on the modest lily’s leaves of snow
 The proud sun revels in resplendent rays! 
Warm as his beams this sensate heart shall glow,
 Till life’s last hour with Phaon’s self decays! 

Sonnet XI. — Rejects the Influence of Reason

Oh Reason, vaunted sovereign of the mind –
 Thou pompous vision with a sounding name! 
Canst thou the soul’s rebellious passions tame? 
Canst thou in spells the vagrant fancy bind? 
Ah no, capricious as the wavering wind
 Are sighs of love that dim thy boasted flame,
 While Folly’s torch consumes the wreath of fame,
 And Pleasure’s hands the sheaves of truth unbind. 
Pressed by the storms of fate, hope shrinks and dies;
 Frenzy darts forth in mightiest ills arrayed;
 Around thy throne destructive tumults rise,
 And Hell-fraught jealousies thy rights invade! 
Then, what art thou, oh idol of the wise? –
 A visionary theme! A gorgeous shade! 

Sonnet XII. — Previous to her Interview with Phaon

Now, o’er the tesselated pavement strew
 Fresh saffron, steeped in essence of the rose,
 While down yon agate column gently flows
 A glittering streamlet of ambrosial dew! 
My Phaon smiles! The rich carnation’s hue,
 On his flushed cheek in conscious lustre glows,
 While o’er his breast enamoured Venus throws
 Her starry mantle of celestial blue! 
Breathe soft, ye dulcet flutes, among the trees
 Where clustering boughs with golden citrons twine;
 While slow vibrations, dying on the breeze,
 Shall soothe his soul with harmony divine. 
Then let my form his yielding fancy seize,
 And all his fondest wishes blend with mine! 

Sonnet XIII. — She Endeavours to Fascinate Him

Bring, bring, to deck my brow, ye sylvan girls,
 A roseate wreath – nor for my waving hair
 The costly band of studded gems prepare,
 Of sparkling chrysolite, or orient pearls! 
Love o’er my head his canopy unfurls,
 His purple pinions fan the whispering air;
 Mocking the golden sandal, rich and rare,
 Beneath my feet the fragrant woodbine curls. 
Bring the thin robe, to fold about my breast,
 White as the downy swan; while round my waist
 Let leaves of glossy myrtle bind the vest,
 Not idly gay, but elegantly chaste! 
Love scorns the nymph in wanton trappings dressed;
 And charms the most concealed, are doubly graced. 

Sonnet XIV. — To the Eolian Harp

Come, soft Eolian harp, while zephyr plays
 Along the meek vibration of thy strings,
 As Twilight’s hand her modest mantle brings,
 Blending with sober grey the western blaze! 
Oh prompt my Phaon’s dreams with tenderest lays,
 Ere night o’ershade thee with its humid wings,
 While the lorn philomel his sorrow sings
 In leafy cradle, red with parting rays! 
Slow let thy dulcet tones on ether glide –
 So steals the murmur of the amorous dove;
 The mazy legions swarm on every side,
 To lulling sounds the sunny people move! 
Let not the wise their little world deride,
 The smallest sting can wound the breast of love. 

Sonnet XV. — Phaon Awakes

Now round my favoured grot let roses rise,
 To strew the bank where Phaon wakes from rest! 
Oh happy buds, to kiss his burning breast,
 And die beneath the lustre of his eyes! 
Now let the timbrels echo to the skies,
 Now damsels sprinkle cassia on his vest,
 With odorous wreaths of constant myrtle dressed,
 And flowers, deep tinted with the rainbow’s dyes! 
From cups of porphyry let nectar flow,
 Rich as the perfume of Phoenicia’s vine! 
Now let his dimpling cheek with rapture glow,
 While round his heart love’s mystic fetters twine;
 And let the Grecian lyre its aid bestow,
 In songs of triumph to proclaim him mine! 

Sonnet XXXV. — Reproaches Phaon

What means the mist opaque that veils these eyes? 
Why does yon threatening tempest shroud the day? 
Why does thy altar, Venus, fade away,
 And on my breast the dews of horror rise? 
Phaon is false! Be dim, ye orient skies,
 And let black Erebus succeed your ray! 
Let clashing thunders roll, and lightnings play –
 Phaon is false! and hopeless Sappho dies! 
Farewell, my Lesbian love’, you might have said
 (Such sweet remembrance had some pity proved),
 Or coldly thus, ‘Farewell, oh Lesbian maid’ –
 No task severe for one so fondly loved! 
The gentle thought had soothed my wandering shade,
 From life’s dark valley, and its thorns, removed! 

Sonnet XXXVI. — Her Confirmed Despair

Lead me, Sicilian maids, to haunted bowers,
 While yon pale moon displays her faintest beams
 O’er fading woodlands, and enchanted streams
 Whose banks infect the breeze with poisonous flowers. 
Ah, lead me where the barren mountain towers,
 Where no sounds echo, but the night-owl’s screams;
 Where some lone spirit of the desert gleams,
 And lurid horrors wing the fateful hours! 
Now goaded frenzy grasps my shrinking brain,
 Her touch absorbs the crystal fount of woe! 
My blood rolls burning through each bursting vein:
 Away, lost lyre – unless thou canst bestow
 A charm to lull that agonising pain
 Which those who never loved can never know! 

Sonnet XXXVII. — Foresees Her Death

When, in the gloomy mansion of the dead,
 This withering heart, this faded form shall sleep;
 When these fond eyes at length shall cease to weep,
 And earth’s cold lap receive this feverish head –
 Envy shall turn away, a tear to shed,
 And Time’s obliterating pinions sweep
 The spot where poets shall their vigils keep
 To mourn and wander near my freezing bed! 
Then my pale ghost upon the Elysian shore
 Shall smile, released from every mortal care,
 While (doomed love’s victim to repine no more)
 My breast shall bathe in endless rapture there –
 Ah no, my restless shade would still deplore,
 Nor taste that bliss, which Phaon did not share! 

Sonnet XXXVIII. — To a Sigh

Oh sigh, thou stealest (the herald of the breast)
 The lover’s fears, the lover’s pangs, to tell;
 Thou bidst with timid grace the bosom swell,
 Cheating the day of joy, the night of rest! 
Oh lucid tears, with eloquence confessed,
 Why on my fading cheek unheeded dwell,
 Meek as the dew-drops on the flowret’s bell
 By ruthless tempests to the green-sod pressed. 
Fond sigh, be hushed! Congeal, oh slighted tear –
 Thy feeble powers the busy Fates control! 
Or if thy crystal streams again appear,
 Let them, like Lethe’s, to oblivion roll –
 For love the tyrant plays when hope is near,
 And she who flies the lover, chains the soul! 

Sonnet XXXIX. — To the Muses

Prepare your wreaths, Aonian maids divine,
 To strew the tranquil bed where I shall sleep;
 In tears, the myrtle and the laurel steep,
 And let Erato’s hand the trophies twine. 
No Parian marble there, with laboured line
 Shall bid the wandering lover stay to weep;
 There holy silence shall her vigils keep
 Save when the nightingale such woes as mine
 Shall sadly sing; as twilight’s curtains spread,
 There shall the branching lotus widely wave,
 Sprinkling soft showers upon the lily’s head,
 Sweet drooping emblem for a lover’s grave! 
And there shall Phaon pearls of pity shed
 To gem the vanquished heart he scorned to save! 

Sonnet XL. — Visions Appear to Her in a Dream

On the low margin of a murmuring stream,
 As rapt in meditation’s arms I lay,
 Each aching sense in slumbers stole away,
 While potent fancy formed a soothing dream. 
O’er the Leucadian deep, a dazzling beam
 Shed the bland light of empyrean day –
 But soon transparent shadows veiled each ray,
 While mystic visions sprang athwart the gleam! 
Now to the heaving gulf they seemed to bend,
 And now across the sphery regions glide;
 Now in mid-air their dulcet voices blend:
 ‘Awake! awake!’ the restless phalanx cried,
 ‘See ocean yawns the lover’s woes to end;
 Plunge the green wave, and bid thy griefs subside!’ 

Sonnet XLI. — Resolves to Take the Leap of Leucata

Yes, I will go, where circling whirlwinds rise,
 Where threatening clouds in sable grandeur lour;
 Where the blast yells, the liquid columns pour,
 And maddening billows combat with the skies! 
There, while the Demon of the Tempest flies
 On growing pinions through the troublous hour,
 The wild waves gasp impatient to devour,
 And on the rock the wakened vulture cries! 
Oh! dreadful solace to the stormy mind –
 To me, more pleasing than the valley’s rest,
 The woodland songsters, or the sportive kind
 That nip the turf, or prune the painted crest;
 For in despair alone, the wretched find
 That unction sweet, which lulls the bleeding breast! 

Sonnet XLII. — Her Last Appeal to Phaon

Oh! canst thou bear to see this faded frame
 Deformed and mangled by the rocky deep? 
Wilt thou remember, and forbear to weep,
 My fatal fondness and my peerless fame? 
Soon o’er this heart, now warm with passion’s flame,
 The howling winds and foamy waves shall sweep –
 These eyes be ever closed in death’s cold sleep,
 And all of Sappho perish, but her name! 
Yet, if the Fates suspend their barbarous ire,
 If days less mournful, Heaven designs for me,
 If rocks grow kind, and winds and waves conspire
 To bear me softly on the swelling sea –
 To Phoebus only will I tune my lyre,
 ‘What suits with Sappho, Phoebus, suits with thee!’ 

Sonnet XLIII. — Her Reflections on the Leucadian Rock Before She Perishes

While from the dizzy precipice I gaze,
 The world receding from my pensive eyes,
 High o’er my head the tyrant eagle flies,
 Clothed in the sinking sun’s transcendent blaze! 
The meek-eyed moon, midst clouds of amber plays,
 As o’er the purpling plains of light she hies,
 Till the last stream of living lustre dies,
 And the cool concave owns her tempered rays! 
So shall this glowing, palpitating soul,
 Welcome returning reason’s placid beam,
 While o’er my breast the waves Lethean roll,
 To calm rebellious fancy’s feverish dream. 
Then shall my lyre disdain love’s dread control,
 And loftier passions prompt the loftier theme! 

Sonnet XLIV. — Sonnet Conclusive

Here droops the Muse! while from her glowing mind,
 Celestial Sympathy, with humid eye,
 Bids the light sylph (capricious Fancy) fly,
 Time’s restless wings with transient flowers to bind! 
For now, with folded arms and head inclined,
 Reflection pours the deep and frequent sigh
 O’er the dark scroll of human destiny,
 Where gaudy buds and wounding thorns are twined. 
Oh, sky-born Virtue! sacred is thy name –
 And though mysterious Fate, with frown severe,
 Oft decorates thy brows with wreaths of fame
 Bespangled o’er with Sorrow’s chilling tear,
 Yet shalt thou more than mortal raptures claim,
 The brightest planet of the eternal sphere! 
