To Ovid

Ovidius, I live not far from that still shore
To which you, banished here, brought cenfuries before
Exiled paternal Lares, and where you left your ashes.
Your unconsoled lament has made these places precious;
Your lyre’s caressing voice has not been silenced yet;
The region still resounds with you and your regret.
You roam, as if alive, in my imagination
This gloomy emptiness, the poet’s desolation,
The heaven’s misty vault, the ever-present snows,
The meads which grudging thaws but fleetingly disclose.
How often, beckoned by your grieving strings anew,
My heart has been abroad, my Ovid, trailing you!
I saw your alley heave, by sporting breakers tossed,
I saw your anchor cast off this ungentle coast
Which loured to pay the singer loving’s harsh reward,
Hills that no grapes, crops that no shade afford;
Engendered in the snows for cruelty of arms,
There frozen Scythia’s sons in ever ready swarms
Are crouched in ambush just beyond the Dniestr's water
To rake the settlements with random raid and slaughter.
No hindrance can withstand their daring and device,
They brave the swirling flood, they cross the ringing ice.
You, Naso, marvel too how strangely fate has turned:
You, who from boyhood up the craft of weapons spurned,
Who was accustomed once to braid your hair with flowers
And pass in mellow ease uncounted carefree hours,
Now to go helmeted and, iron-clad entire,
To keep the fearsome sword next to the bashful lyre!

Here neither wife nor child, companions’ faithful ring,
Nor muses, light-o-loves of former dallying,
Surround you still to soothe the banished singer’s grief.
In vain did Graces crown your verse with laurel leaf,
In vain do youths and maids by heart recite them still:
For neither fame nor age, nor plaints and sadness will,
Nor timid verse, avail to wear Octavian down;
In deep forgetfulness your dim old age must drown.
Aureate Italy’s luxurious citizen,
On that barbarian coast alone, unknown to men,
Long out of hearing now of sounds of native speech,
Heavy of heart you write to friends for out of reach:
"O friends, restore me to our fathers’ sacred city,
Ancestral gardens’ shade return to me, for pity!
Oh carry to Augustus, friends, my meek imploring,
The castigating hand, say it with tears outpouring!
But shoud the demigod be proved relentless still,
And while I live, great Rome denied me by his will,
Then let dread fate be dulled by yet a final plea:
My grave at least be close to lovely Italy!”
Whose frozen heart, poetic graces scorning,
Would dare upbraid your plaints, your bitter tears of mourning?
What swelled-up crudity could listen quite unstirred
To those pure elegies, last of your songs we heard,
Where you bequeathed to time the moan that found no ears?

Myself, hardbitten Slav, I did not shed such tears;
I understood them, though; exiled for self-will vented,
With world of men, myself, existence discontented,
I visited, my soul in meditative mood,
The land where you endured your dolorous solitude.
Here, by your image first new-quickened fancy granted,
I sang, Ovidius, afresh the songs you chanted,
And came to find them true, those landscapes of your grief
I had my mind beguiled by dreams which make belief;
That banishment of yours must have beshrewed my sight
Accustomed still to snows, septentrional night.
For here with longer glow celestial azure warms;
Here only briefly reigns the wrath of winter storms.
Here on the Scythian slopes a recent graft, the luscious
Fosterling of the south, the grape, in purple blushes.
By now on Russian meadows rough December squalls
Have showered blanketings of snow in fluffy shawls.
A scintillating sun here circles overhead;
There winter blights the air — in vernal warmth instead
Here withered pasture herb to brilliant greening yields;
The early plough has scored the liberated fields;
A breeze will barely breathe, and cooler grow at dusk,
Ice, on the lake a half-transparent husk,
Beneath its crystal holds unmoving streams confined:
Your timid enterprise recalling to my mind,
That day, by inspiration’s rushing pinions marked,
When first, with some distrust, your halting foot embarked
Upon the element benumbed by winter's spell,
And over virgin ice — I seemed to see it well —
Your shade would glide before, and mournful notes intone
That wavered from afar like parting’s smothered moan.

Be comforted; unwilting, Ovid’s wreath has bloomed!
But I, alas, a bard lost in the crowd, am doomed
To soundlessness, and as this age of men goes by,
A nameless sacrifice, my feeble gift must die
With my sad life and but a murmuring of fame ...
Yet if a distant scion yet heard of me and came
To search the length and breadth of these forsaken places
Near Ovid’s fabled dust for my forgotten traces,
Then from the zone of gloom, oblivion’s outer rim,
My grateful shade would rise and fly to welcome him,
And dear to me would be his kindly recognition.
May there live on in men your sanctified tradition:
For sentenced, as were you, to an unpitying lot,
In fate I was your match, albeit in glory not.
Here, livening with lays of north the vacant lands,
I wandered — while on banks of Danube firebrands
Of freedom by the great-souled Greek were hurled —
With not a single friend to hear me in the world.
But meadows, drowsy groves, and hillocks were beguiled
By my outlandish song, and placid muses smiled.
