The Two-Part Prelude

First Part

Was it for this
 That one, the fairest of all rivers, loved
 To blend his murmurs with my nurse’s song,
 And from his alder shades and rocky falls,
 And from his fords and shallows, sent a voice
 That flowed along my dreams? For this didst thou,
 Oh Derwent, travelling over the green plains
 Near my ‘sweet birthplace’, didst thou, beauteous stream,
 Make ceaseless music through the night and day,
 Which with its steady cadence tempering
 Our human waywardness, composed my thoughts
 To more than infant softness, giving me
 Among the fretful dwellings of mankind
 A knowledge, a dim earnest, of the calm
 Which Nature breathes among the fields and groves? 
Belov
                  ed
                 Derwent, fairest of all streams,
 Was it for this that I, a four years’ child,
 A naked boy, among thy silent pools
 Made one long bathing of a summer’s day,
 Basked in the sun, or plunged into thy streams,
 Alternate, all a summer’s day, or coursed
 Over the sandy fields, and dashed the flowers
 Of yellow groundsel – or, when crag and hill,
 The woods, and distant Skiddaw’s lofty height,
 Were bronzed with a deep radiance, stood alone
 A naked savage in the thunder-shower? 

And afterwards (’twas in a later day,
 Though early), when upon the mountain-slope
 The frost and breath of frosty wind had snapped
 The last autumnal crocus, ’twas my joy
 To wander half the night among the cliffs
 And the smooth hollows where the woodcocks ran
 Along the moonlight turf. In thought and wish
 That time, my shoulder all with springes hung,
 I was a fell destroyer. Gentle powers,
 Who give us happiness and call it peace,
 When scudding on from snare to snare I plied
 My anxious visitation, hurrying on,
 Still hurrying, hurrying onward, how my heart
 Panted! – among the scattered yew-trees and the crags
 That looked upon me, how my bosom beat
 With expectation! Sometimes strong desire
 Resistless overpowered me, and the bird
 Which was the captive of another’s toils
 Became my prey; and when the deed was done
 I heard among the solitary hills
 Low breathings coming after me, and sounds
 Of undistinguishable motion, steps
 Almost as silent as the turf they trod. 

Nor less in springtime, when on southern banks
 The shining sun had from his knot of leaves
 Decoyed the primrose flower, and when the vales
 And woods were warm, was I a rover then
 In the high places, on the lonesome peaks,
 Among the mountains and the winds. Though mean
 And though inglorious were my views, the end
 Was not ignoble. Oh, when I have hung
 Above the raven’s nest, by knots of grass
 Or half-inch fissures in the slippery rock
 But ill sustained, and almost, as it seemed,
 Suspended by the blast which blew amain
 Shouldering the naked crag, oh, at that time,
 While on the perilous ridge I hung alone,
 With what strange utterance did the loud dry wind
 Blow through my ears; the sky seemed not a sky
 Of earth, and with what motion moved the clouds! 

The mind of man is fashioned and built up
 Even as a strain of music. I believe
 That there are spirits which, when they would form
 A favoured being, from his very dawn
 Of infancy do open out the clouds
 As at the touch of lightning, seeking him
 With gentle visitation – quiet powers,
 Retired, and seldom recognized, yet kind,
 And to the very meanest not unknown –
 With me, though, rarely in my boyish days
 They communed. Others too there are, who use,
 Yet haply aiming at the self-same end,
 Severer interventions, ministry
 More palpable – and of their school was I. 

They guided me: one evening led by them
 I went alone into a shepherd’s boat,
 A skiff, that to a willow-tree was tied
 Within a rocky cave, its usual home. 
The moon was up, the lake was shining clear
 Among the hoary mountains; from the shore
 I pushed, and struck the oars, and struck again
 In cadence, and my little boat moved on
 Just like a man who walks with stately step
 Though bent on speed. It was an act of stealth
 And troubled pleasure. Not without the voice
 Of mountain echoes did my boat move on,
 Leaving behind her still on either side
 Small circles glittering idly in the moon,
 Until they melted all into one track
 Of sparkling light. 
A rocky steep uprose
 Above the cavern of the willow-tree,
 And now, as suited one who proudly rowed
 With his best skill, I fixed a steady view
 Upon the top of that same craggy ridge,
 The bound of the horizon – for behind
 Was nothing but the stars and the grey sky. 
She was an elfin pinnace; twenty times
 I dipped my oars into the silent lake,
 And as I rose upon the stroke my boat
 Went heaving through the water like a swan –
 When from behind that rocky steep, till then
 The bound of the horizon, a huge cliff,
 As if with voluntary power instinct,
 Upreared its head. I struck, and struck again,
 And, growing still in stature, the huge cliff
 Rose up between me and the stars, and still,
 With measured motion, like a living thing
 Strode after me. With trembling hands I turned,
 And through the silent water stole my way
 Back to the cavern of the willow-tree. 
There in her mooring-place I left my bark,
 And through the meadows homeward went with grave
 And serious thoughts; and after I had seen
 That spectacle, for many days my brain
 Worked with a dim and undetermined sense
 Of unknown modes of being. In my thoughts
 There was a darkness – call it solitude,
 Or blank desertion – no familiar shapes
 Of hourly objects, images of trees,
 Of sea or sky, no colours of green fields,
 But huge and mighty forms that do not live
 Like living men moved slowly through my mind
 By day, and were the trouble of my dreams. 

Ah, not in vain ye beings of the hills,
 And ye that walk the woods and open heaths
 By moon or starlight, thus, from my first dawn
 Of childhood, did ye love to intertwine
 The passions that build up our human soul
 Not with the mean and vulgar works of man,
 But with high objects, with eternal things,
 With life and Nature, purifying thus
 The elements of feeling and of thought,
 And sanctifying by such discipline
 Both pain and fear, until we recognize
 A grandeur in the beatings of the heart. 

Nor was this fellowship vouchsafed to me
 With stinted kindness. In November days,
 When vapours rolling down the valleys made
 A lonely scene more lonesome, among woods
 At noon, and mid the calm of summer nights
 When by the margin of the trembling lake
 Beneath the gloomy hills I homeward went
 In solitude, such intercourse was mine. 

And in the frosty season, when the sun
 Was set, and visible for many a mile
 The cottage windows through the twilight blazed,
 I heeded not the summons. Clear and loud
 The village-clock tolled six; I wheeled about
 Proud and exulting, like an untired horse
 That cares not for its home. All shod with steel
 We hissed along the polished ice in games
 Confederate, imitative of the chase
 And woodland pleasures, the resounding horn,
 The pack loud bellowing, and the hunted hare. 
So through the darkness and the cold we flew,
 And not a voice was idle. With the din,
 Meanwhile, the precipices rang aloud;
 The leafless trees and every icy crag
 Tinkled like iron; while the distant hills
 Into the tumult sent an alien sound
 Of melancholy, not unnoticed; while the stars,
 Eastward, were sparkling clear, and in the west
 The orange sky of evening died away. 

Not seldom from the uproar I retired
 Into a silent bay, or sportively
 Glanced sideway, leaving the tumultuous throng,
 To cut across the shadow of a star
 That gleamed upon the ice. And oftentimes
 When we had given our bodies to the wind
 And all the shadowy banks on either side
 Came sweeping through the darkness, spinning still
 The rapid line of motion, then at once
 Have I, reclining back upon my heels,
 Stopped short – yet still the solitary cliffs
 Wheeled by me, even as if the earth had rolled
 With visible motion her diurnal round. 
Behind me did they stretch in solemn train,
 Feebler and feebler, and I stood and watched
 Till all was tranquil as a summer sea. 

Ye powers of earth, ye genii of the springs,
 And ye that have your voices in the clouds,
 And ye that are familiars of the lakes
 And of the standing pools, I may not think
 A vulgar hope was yours when ye employed
 Such ministry – when ye through many a year
 Thus by the agency of boyish sports,
 On caves and trees, upon the woods and hills,
 Impressed upon all forms the characters
 Of danger or desire, and thus did make
 The surface of the universal earth
 With meanings of delight, of hope and fear,
 Work like a sea. 
Not uselessly employed,
 I might pursue this theme through every change
 Of exercise and sport to which the year
 Did summon us in its delightful round. 
We were a noisy crew; the sun in heaven
 Beheld not vales more beautiful than ours,
 Nor saw a race in happiness and joy
 More worthy of the fields where they were sown. 
I would record with no reluctant voice
 Our home amusements by the warm peat fire
 At evening, when with pencil and with slate,
 In square divisions parcelled out, and all
 With crosses and with cyphers scribbled o’er,
 We schemed and puzzled, head opposed to head,
 In strife too humble to be named in verse;
 Or round the naked table, snow-white deal,
 Cherry, or maple, sat in close array,
 And to the combat – loo or whist – led on
 A thick-ribbed army, not as in the world
 Discarded and ungratefully thrown by
 Even for the very service they had wrought,
 But husbanded through many a long campaign. 

Oh, with what echoes on the board they fell –
 Ironic diamonds, hearts of sable hue,
 Queens gleaming through their splendour’s last decay,
 Knaves wrapped in one assimilating gloom,
 And kings indignant at the shame incurred
 By royal visages. Meanwhile abroad
 The heavy rain was falling, or the frost
 Raged bitterly with keen and silent tooth,
 And, interrupting the impassioned game,
 Oft from the neighbouring lake the splitting ice,
 While it sank down towards the water, sent
 Among the meadows and the hills its long
 And frequent yellings, imitative some
 Of wolves that howl along the Bothnic main. 

Nor with less willing heart would I rehearse
 The woods of autumn, and their hidden bowers
 With milk-white clusters hung; the rod and line –
 True symbol of the foolishness of hope –
 Which with its strong enchantment led me on
 By rocks and pools, where never summer star
 Impressed its shadow, to forlorn cascades
 Among the windings of the mountain-brooks;
 The kite in sultry calms from some high hill
 Sent up, ascending thence till it was lost
 Among the fleecy clouds – in gusty days
 Launched from the lower grounds, and suddenly
 Dashed headlong and rejected by the storm. 
All these, and more, with rival claims demand
 Grateful acknowledgement. It were a song
 Venial, and such as (if I rightly judge)
 I might protract unblamed, but I perceive
 That much is overlooked, and we should ill
 Attain our object if, from delicate fears
 Of breaking in upon the unity
 Of this my argument, I should omit
 To speak of such effects as cannot here
 Be regularly classed, yet tend no less
 To the same point – the growth of mental power
 And love of Nature’s works. 
Ere I had seen
 Eight summers (and ’twas in the very week
 When I was first transplanted to thy vale,
 Belov
                  ed
                 Hawkshead! – when thy paths, thy shores
 And brooks, were like a dream of novelty
 To my half-infant mind), I chanced to cross
 One of those open fields which, shaped like ears,
 Make green peninsulas on Esthwaite’s lake. 
Twilight was coming on, yet through the gloom
 I saw distinctly on the opposite shore,
 Beneath a tree and close by the lake side,
 A heap of garments, as if left by one
 Who there was bathing. Half an hour I watched
 And no one owned them; meanwhile the calm lake
 Grew dark with all the shadows on its breast,
 And now and then a leaping fish disturbed
 The breathless stillness. 
The succeeding day
 There came a company, and in their boat
 Sounded with iron hooks and with long poles. 
At length the dead man, mid that beauteous scene
 Of trees and hills and water, bolt upright
 Rose with his ghastly face. I might advert
 To numerous accidents in flood or field,
 Quarry or moor, or mid the winter snows,
 Distresses and disasters, tragic facts
 Of rural history that impressed my mind
 With images to which in following years
 Far other feelings were attached – with forms
 That yet exist with independent life,
 And, like their archetypes, know no decay. 

There are in our existence spots of time
 Which with distinct preeminence retain
 A fructifying virtue, whence, depressed
 By trivial occupations and the round
 Of ordinary intercourse, our minds –
 Especially the imaginative power –
 Are nourished and invisibly repaired. 
Such moments chiefly seem to have their date
 In our first childhood. 
I remember well
 (’Tis of an early season that I speak,
 The twilight of rememberable life),
 While I was yet an urchin, one who scarce
 Could hold a bridle, with ambitious hopes
 I mounted, and we rode towards the hills. 
We were a pair of horsemen: honest James
 Was with me, my encourager and guide. 
We had not travelled long ere some mischance
 Disjoined me from my comrade, and, through fear
 Dismounting, down the rough and stony moor
 I led my horse, and stumbling on, at length
 Came to a bottom where in former times
 A man, the murderer of his wife, was hung
 In irons. Mouldered was the gibbet-mast;
 The bones were gone, the iron and the wood;
 Only a long green ridge of turf remained
 Whose shape was like a grave. I left the spot,
 And reascending the bare slope I saw
 A naked pool that lay beneath the hills,
 The beacon on the summit, and more near
 A girl who bore a pitcher on her head
 And seemed with difficult steps to force her way
 Against the blowing wind. It was in truth
 An ordinary sight, but I should need
 Colours and words that are unknown to man
 To paint the visionary dreariness
 Which, while I looked all round for my lost guide,
 Did at that time invest the naked pool,
 The beacon on the lonely eminence,
 The woman and her garments vexed and tossed
 By the strong wind. 
Nor less I recollect –
 Long after, though my childhood had not ceased –
 Another scene which left a kindred power
 Implanted in my mind. One Christmas-time,
 The day before the holidays began,
 Feverish, and tired, and restless, I went forth
 Into the fields, impatient for the sight
 Of those three horses which should bear us home,
 My brothers and myself. There was a crag,
 An eminence, which from the meeting-point
 Of two highways ascending overlooked
 At least a long half-mile of those two roads,
 By each of which the expected steeds might come –
 The choice uncertain. Thither I repaired
 Up to the highest summit. ’Twas a day
 Stormy, and rough, and wild, and on the grass
 I sat half sheltered by a naked wall. 
Upon my right hand was a single sheep,
 A whistling hawthorn on my left, and there,
 Those two companions at my side, I watched
 With eyes intensely straining, as the mist
 Gave intermitting prospects of the wood
 And plain beneath. 
Ere I to school returned
 That dreary time, ere I had been ten days
 A dweller in my father’s house, he died,
 And I and my two brothers, orphans then,
 Followed his body to the grave. The event,
 With all the sorrow which it brought, appeared
 A chastisement; and when I called to mind
 That day so lately passed, when from the crag
 I looked in such anxiety of hope,
 With trite reflections of morality,
 Yet with the deepest passion, I bowed low
 To God who thus corrected my desires. 
And afterwards the wind and sleety rain,
 And all the business of the elements,
 The single sheep, and the one blasted tree,
 And the bleak music of that old stone wall,
 The noise of wood and water, and the mist
 Which on the line of each of those two roads
 Advanced in such indisputable shapes –
 All these were spectacles and sounds to which
 I often would repair, and thence would drink
 As at a fountain. And I do not doubt
 That in this later time, when storm and rain
 Beat on my roof at midnight, or by day
 When I am in the woods, unknown to me
 The workings of my spirit thence are brought. 

Nor, sedulous as I have been to trace
 How Nature by collateral interest,
 And by extrinsic passion, peopled first
 My mind with forms or beautiful or grand
 And made me love them, may I well forget
 How other pleasures have been mine, and joys
 Of subtler origin – how I have felt
 Not seldom, even in that tempestuous time,
 Those hallowed and pure motions of the sense
 Which seem in their simplicity to own
 An intellectual charm, that calm delight
 Which, if I err not, surely must belong
 To those first-born affinities that fit
 Our new existence to existing things,
 And, in our dawn of being, constitute
 The bond of union betwixt life and joy. 

Yes, I remember when the changeful earth
 And twice five seasons on my mind had stamped
 The faces of the moving year, even then,
 A child, I held unconscious intercourse
 With the eternal beauty, drinking in
 A pure organic pleasure from the lines
 Of curling mist, or from the level plain
 Of waters coloured by the steady clouds. 
The sands of Westmorland, the creeks and bays
 Of Cumbria’s rocky limits, they can tell
 How when the sea threw off his evening shade
 And to the shepherd’s hut beneath the crags
 Did send sweet notice of the rising moon,
 How I have stood, to images like these
 A stranger, linking with the spectacle
 No body of associated forms,
 And bringing with me no peculiar sense
 Of quietness or peace – yet I have stood
 Even while my eye has moved o’er three long leagues
 Of shining water, gathering, as it seemed,
 Through the wide surface of that field of light
 New pleasure, like a bee among the flowers. 

Thus often in those fits of vulgar joy
 Which through all seasons on a child’s pursuits
 Are prompt attendants, mid that giddy bliss
 Which like a tempest works along the blood
 And is forgotten, even then I felt
 Gleams like the flashing of a shield. The earth
 And common face of Nature spake to me
 Rememberable things – sometimes, ’tis true,
 By quaint associations, yet not vain
 Nor profitless, if haply they impressed
 Collateral objects and appearances,
 Albeit lifeless then, and doomed to sleep
 Until maturer seasons called them forth
 To impregnate and to elevate the mind. 
And if the vulgar joy by its own weight
 Wearied itself out of the memory,
 The scenes which were a witness of that joy
 Remained, in their substantial lineaments
 Depicted on the brain, and to the eye
 Were visible, a daily sight. And thus
 By the impressive agency of fear,
 By pleasure and repeated happiness –
 So frequently repeated – and by force
 Of obscure feelings representative
 Of joys that were forgotten, these same scenes,
 So beauteous and majestic in themselves,
 Though yet the day was distant, did at length
 Become habitually dear, and all
 Their hues and forms were by invisible links
 Allied to the affections. 
I began
 My story early, feeling, as I fear,
 The weakness of a human love for days
 Disowned by memory – ere the birth of spring
 Planting my snowdrops among winter snows. 
Nor will it seem to thee, my friend, so prompt
 In sympathy, that I have lengthened out
 With fond and feeble tongue a tedious tale. 
Meanwhile my hope has been that I might fetch
 Reproaches from my former years, whose power
 May spur me on, in manhood now mature,
 To honourable toil. Yet should it be
 That this is but an impotent desire –
 That I by such inquiry am not taught
 To understand myself, nor thou to know
 With better knowledge how the heart was framed
 Of him thou lovest – need I dread from thee
 Harsh judgements if I am so loath to quit
 Those recollected hours that have the charm
 Of visionary things, and lovely forms
 And sweet sensations, that throw back our life
 And make our infancy a visible scene
 On which the sun is shining? 

Second Part

Thus far, my friend, have we retraced the way
 Through which I travelled when I first began
 To love the woods and fields. The passion yet
 Was in its birth, sustained, as might befall,
 By nourishment that came unsought – for still
 From week to week, from month to month, we lived
 A round of tumult. Duly were our games
 Prolonged in summer till the daylight failed:
 No chair remained before the doors, the bench
 And threshold-steps were empty, fast asleep
 The labourer and the old man who had sat
 A later lingerer, yet the revelry
 Continued and the loud uproar. At last,
 When all the ground was dark and the huge clouds
 Were edged with twinkling stars, to bed we went
 With weary joints and with a beating mind. 
Ah, is there one, who ever has been young
 And needs a monitory voice to tame
 The pride of virtue and of intellect? 
And is there one, the wisest and the best
 Of all mankind, who does not sometimes wish
 For things which cannot be, who would not give,
 If so he might, to duty and to truth
 The eagerness of infantine desire? 
A tranquillizing spirit presses now
 On my corporeal frame, so wide appears
 The vacancy between me and those days,
 Which yet have such self-presence in my heart
 That sometimes when I think of them I seem
 Two consciousnesses – conscious of myself,
 And of some other being. 
A grey stone
 Of native rock, left midway in the square
 Of our small market-village, was the home
 And centre of these joys; and when, returned
 After long absence, thither I repaired,
 I found that it was split and gone to build
 A smart assembly-room that perked and flared
 With wash and rough-cast, elbowing the ground
 Which had been ours. But let the fiddle scream,
 And be ye happy! Yet I know, my friends,
 That more than one of you will think with me
 Of those soft starry nights, and that old dame
 From whom the stone was named, who there had sat
 And watched her table with its huckster’s wares,
 Assiduous, for the length of sixty years. 

We ran a boisterous race, the year spun round
 With giddy motion; but the time approached
 That brought with it a regular desire
 For calmer pleasures – when the beauteous scenes
 Of Nature were collaterally attached
 To every scheme of holiday delight,
 And every boyish sport, less grateful else
 And languidly pursued. When summer came
 It was the pastime of our afternoons
 To beat along the plain of Windermere
 With rival oars; and the selected bourne
 Was now an island musical with birds
 That sang for ever, now a sister isle
 Beneath the oak’s umbrageous covert, sown
 With lilies-of-the-valley like a field,
 And now a third small island where remained
 An old stone table and one mouldered cave –
 A hermit’s history. In such a race,
 So ended, disappointment could be none,
 Uneasiness, or pain, or jealousy;
 We rested in the shade, all pleased alike,
 Conquered or conqueror. Thus our selfishness
 Was mellowed down, and thus the pride of strength
 And the vainglory of superior skill
 Were interfused with objects which subdued
 And tempered them, and gradually produced
 A quiet independence of the heart. 
And to my friend who knows me I may add,
 Unapprehensive of reproof, that hence
 Ensued a diffidence and modesty,
 And I was taught to feel – perhaps too much –
 The self-sufficing power of solitude. 

No delicate viands sapped our bodily strength:
 More than we wished we knew the blessing then
 Of vigorous hunger, for our daily meals
 Were frugal, Sabine fare – and then, exclude
 A little weekly stipend, and we lived
 Through three divisions of the quartered year
 In penniless poverty. But now, to school
 Returned from the half-yearly holidays,
 We came with purses more profusely filled,
 Allowance which abundantly sufficed
 To gratify the palate with repasts
 More costly than the dame of whom I spake,
 That ancient woman, and her board, supplied. 
Hence inroads into distant vales, and long
 Excursions far away among the hills,
 Hence rustic dinners on the cool green ground –
 Or in the woods, or by a river-side
 Or fountain – festive banquets, that provoked
 The languid action of a natural scene
 By pleasure of corporeal appetite. 

Nor is my aim neglected if I tell
 How twice in the long length of those half-years
 We from our funds perhaps with bolder hand
 Drew largely, anxious for one day at least
 To feel the motion of the galloping steed;
 And with the good old innkeeper, in truth,
 I needs must say that sometimes we have used
 Sly subterfuge, for the intended bound
 Of the day’s journey was too distant far
 For any cautious man: a structure famed
 Beyond its neighbourhood, the antique walls
 Of a large abbey, with its fractured arch,
 Belfry, and images, and living trees –
 A holy scene. Along the smooth green turf
 Our horses grazed. In more than inland peace,
 Left by the winds that overpass the vale,
 In that sequestered ruin trees and towers –
 Both silent and both motionless alike –
 Hear all day long the murmuring sea that beats
 Incessantly upon a craggy shore. 

Our steeds remounted, and the summons given,
 With whip and spur we by the chantry flew
 In uncouth race, and left the cross-legged knight
 And the stone abbot, and that single wren
 Which one day sang so sweetly in the nave
 Of the old church that, though from recent showers
 The earth was comfortless, and, touched by faint
 Internal breezes, from the roofless walls
 The shuddering ivy dripped large drops, yet still
 So sweetly mid the gloom the invisible bird
 Sang to itself that there I could have made
 My dwelling-place, and lived for ever there,
 To hear such music. Through the walls we flew
 And down the valley, and, a circuit made
 In wantonness of heart, through rough and smooth
 We scampered homeward. Oh, ye rocks and streams,
 And that still spirit of the evening air,
 Even in this joyous time I sometimes felt
 Your presence, when, with slackened step, we breathed
 Along the sides of the steep hills, or when,
 Lightened by gleams of moonlight from the sea,
 We beat with thundering hoofs the level sand. 

There was a row of ancient trees, since fallen,
 That on the margin of a jutting land
 Stood near the lake of Coniston, and made,
 With its long boughs above the water stretched,
 A gloom through which a boat might sail along
 As in a cloister. An old hall was near,
 Grotesque and beautiful, its gavel-end
 And huge round chimneys to the top o’ergrown
 With fields of ivy. Thither we repaired –
 ’Twas even a custom with us – to the shore,
 And to that cool piazza. They who dwelt
 In the neglected mansion-house supplied
 Fresh butter, tea-kettle and earthenware,
 And chafing-dish with smoking coals; and so
 Beneath the trees we sat in our small boat,
 And in the covert ate our delicate meal
 Upon the calm smooth lake. 
It was a joy
 Worthy the heart of one who is full-grown
 To rest beneath those horizontal boughs
 And mark the radiance of the setting sun,
 Himself unseen, reposing on the top
 Of the high eastern hills. And there I said,
 That beauteous sight before me, there I said
 (Then first beginning in my thoughts to mark
 That sense of dim similitude which links
 Our moral feelings with external forms)
 That in whatever region I should close
 My mortal life I would remember you,
 Fair scenes – that dying I would think on you,
 My soul would send a longing look to you,
 Even as that setting sun, while all the vale
 Could nowhere catch one faint memorial gleam,
 Yet with the last remains of his last light
 Still lingered, and a farewell lustre threw
 On the dear mountain-tops where first he rose. 
’Twas then my fourteenth summer, and these words
 Were uttered in a casual access
 Of sentiment, a momentary trance
 That far outran the habit of my mind. 

Upon the eastern shore of Windermere
 Above the crescent of a pleasant bay
 There was an inn, no homely-featured shed,
 Brother of the surrounding cottages,
 But ’twas a splendid place, the door beset
 With chaises, grooms, and liveries, and within
 Decanters, glasses and the blood-red wine. 
In ancient times, or ere the hall was built
 On the large island, had the dwelling been
 More worthy of a poet’s love, a hut
 Proud of its one bright fire and sycamore shade;
 But though the rhymes were gone which once inscribed
 The threshold, and large golden characters
 On the blue-frosted signboard had usurped
 The place of the old lion, in contempt
 And mockery of the rustic painter’s hand,
 Yet to this hour the spot to me is dear
 With all its foolish pomp. The garden lay
 Upon a slope surmounted by the plain
 Of a small bowling-green; beneath us stood
 A grove, with gleams of water through the trees
 And over the tree-tops – nor did we want
 Refreshment, strawberries and mellow cream –
 And there through half an afternoon we played
 On the smooth platform, and the shouts we sent
 Made all the mountains ring. 
But ere the fall
 Of night, when in our pinnace we returned
 Over the dusky lake, and to the beach
 Of some small island steered our course, with one,
 The minstrel of our troop, and left him there,
 And rowed off gently, while he blew his flute
 Alone upon the rock, oh, then the calm
 And dead still water lay upon my mind
 Even with a weight of pleasure, and the sky,
 Never before so beautiful, sank down
 Into my heart and held me like a dream. 

Thus day by day my sympathies increased,
 And thus the common range of visible things
 Grew dear to me. Already I began
 To love the sun – a boy I loved the sun
 Not as I since have loved him (as a pledge
 And surety of my earthly life, a light
 Which while I view I feel I am alive),
 But for this cause, that I had seen him lay
 His beauty on the morning hills, had seen
 The western mountain touch his setting orb
 In many a thoughtless hour, when from excess
 Of happiness my blood appeared to flow
 With its own pleasure, and I breathed with joy. 
And from like feelings, humble though intense,
 To patriotic and domestic love
 Analogous, the moon to me was dear:
 For I would dream away my purposes
 Standing to look upon her, while she hung
 Midway between the hills as if she knew
 No other region but belonged to thee,
 Yea appertained by a peculiar right
 To thee and thy grey huts, my native vale. 

Those incidental charms which first attached
 My heart to rural objects, day by day
 Grew weaker, and I hasten on to tell
 How Nature, intervenient till this time
 And secondary, now at length was sought
 For her own sake. But who shall parcel out
 His intellect by geometric rules
 Split like a province into round and square? 
Who knows the individual hour in which
 His habits were first sown even as a seed? 
Who that shall point as with a wand, and say
 ‘This portion of the river of my mind
 Came from yon fountain’? Thou, my friend, art one
 More deeply read in thy own thoughts, no slave
 Of that false secondary power by which
 In weakness we create distinctions, then
 Believe our puny boundaries are things
 Which we perceive, and not which we have made. 
To thee, unblinded by these outward shows,
 The unity of all has been revealed;
 And thou wilt doubt with me, less aptly skilled
 Than many are to class the cabinet
 Of their sensations, and in voluble phrase
 Run through the history and birth of each
 As of a single independent thing. 
Hard task to analyze a soul, in which
 Not only general habits and desires,
 But each most obvious and particular thought –
 Not in a mystical and idle sense,
 But in the words of reason deeply weighed –
 Hath no beginning. 
Blest the infant babe –
 For with my best conjectures I would trace
 The progress of our being – blest the babe
 Nursed in his mother’s arms, the babe who sleeps
 Upon his mother’s breast, who, when his soul
 Claims manifest kindred with an earthly soul,
 Doth gather passion from his mother’s eye. 
Such feelings pass into his torpid life
 Like an awakening breeze, and hence his mind,
 Even in the first trial of its powers,
 Is prompt and watchful, eager to combine
 In one appearance all the elements
 And parts of the same object, else detached
 And loath to coalesce. Thus day by day,
 Subjected to the discipline of love,
 His organs and recipient faculties
 Are quickened, are more vigorous; his mind spreads,
 Tenacious of the forms which it receives. 
In one belovéd presence – nay and more,
 In that most apprehensive habitude
 And those sensations which have been derived
 From this belov
                  ed
                 presence – there exists
 A virtue which irradiates and exalts
 All objects through all intercourse of sense. 
No outcast he, bewildered and depressed;
 Along his infant veins are interfused
 The gravitation and the filial bond
 Of Nature that connect him with the world. 

Emphatically such a being lives,
 An inmate of this active universe. 
From Nature largely he receives, nor so
 Is satisfied, but largely gives again;
 For feeling has to him imparted strength,
 And – powerful in all sentiments of grief,
 Of exultation, fear and joy – his mind,
 Even as an agent of the one great mind,
 Creates, creator and receiver both,
 Working but in alliance with the works
 Which it beholds. Such, verily, is the first
 Poetic spirit of our human life –
 By uniform control of after-years
 In most abated and suppressed, in some
 Through every change of growth or of decay
 Pre-eminent till death. 
From early days,
 Beginning not long after that first time
 In which, a babe, by intercourse of touch
 I held mute dialogues with my mother’s heart,
 I have endeavoured to display the means
 Whereby this infant sensibility,
 Great birthright of our being, was in me
 Augmented and sustained. Yet is a path
 More difficult before me, and I fear
 That in its broken windings we shall need
 The chamois’ sinews and the eagle’s wing. 
For now a trouble came into my mind
 From obscure causes. I was left alone
 Seeking this visible world, nor knowing why:
 The props of my affections were removed,
 And yet the building stood, as if sustained
 By its own spirit. All that I beheld
 Was dear to me, and from this cause it came
 That now to Nature’s finer influxes
 My mind lay open – to that more exact
 And intimate communion which our hearts
 Maintain with the minuter properties
 Of objects which already are beloved,
 And of those only. 
Many are the joys
 Of youth, but oh, what happiness to live
 When every hour brings palpable access
 Of knowledge, when all knowledge is delight,
 And sorrow is not there. The seasons came,
 And every season brought a countless store
 Of modes and temporary qualities
 Which but for this most watchful power of love
 Had been neglected – left a register
 Of permanent relations, else unknown. 
Hence life and change and beauty, solitude
 More active even than ‘best society’,
 Society made sweet as solitude
 By silent inobtrusive sympathies,
 And gentle agitations of the mind
 From manifold distinctions (difference
 Perceived in things where to the common eye
 No difference is) – and hence, from the same source,
 Sublimer joy. 
For I would walk alone
 In storm and tempest, or in starlight nights
 Beneath the quiet heavens, and at that time
 Would feel whate’er there is of power in sound
 To breathe an elevated mood, by form
 Or image unprofaned; and I would stand
 Beneath some rock, listening to sounds that are
 The ghostly language of the ancient earth,
 Or make their dim abode in distant winds. 
Thence did I drink the visionary power. 
I deem not profitless these fleeting moods
 Of shadowy exaltation; not for this,
 That they are kindred to our purer mind
 And intellectual life, but that the soul –
 Remembering how she felt, but what she felt
 Remembering not – retains an obscure sense
 Of possible sublimity, to which
 With growing faculties she doth aspire,
 With faculties still growing, feeling still
 That whatsoever point they gain they still
 Have something to pursue. 
And not alone
 In grandeur and in tumult, but no less
 In tranquil scenes, that universal power
 And fitness in the latent qualities
 And essences of things, by which the mind
 Is moved with feelings of delight, to me
 Came strengthened with a superadded soul,
 A virtue not its own. My morning walks
 Were early: oft before the hours of school
 I travelled round our little lake, five miles
 Of pleasant wandering – happy time, more dear
 For this, that one was by my side, a friend
 Then passionately loved. With heart how full
 Will he peruse these lines, this page (perhaps
 A blank to other men); for many years
 Have since flowed in between us, and, our minds
 Both silent to each other, at this time
 We live as if those hours had never been. 
Nor seldom did I lift our cottage latch
 Far earlier, and before the vernal thrush
 Was audible, among the hills I sat
 Alone upon some jutting eminence
 At the first hour of morning, when the vale
 Lay quiet in an utter solitude. 
How shall I trace the history, where seek
 The origin of what I then have felt? 
Oft in those moments such a holy calm
 Did overspread my soul that I forgot
 The agency of sight, and what I saw
 Appeared like something in myself, a dream,
 A prospect in my mind. 
’Twere long to tell
 What spring and autumn, what the winter snows,
 And what the summer shade, what day and night,
 The evening and the morning, what my dreams
 And what my waking thoughts, supplied to nurse
 That spirit of religious love in which
 I walked with Nature. But let this at least
 Be not forgotten, that I still retained
 My first creative sensibility,
 That by the regular action of the world
 My soul was unsubdued. A plastic power
 Abode with me, a forming hand, at times
 Rebellious, acting in a devious mood,
 A local spirit of its own, at war
 With general tendency, but for the most
 Subservient strictly to the external things
 With which it communed. An auxiliar light
 Came from my mind, which on the setting sun
 Bestowed new splendour; the melodious birds,
 The gentle breezes, fountains that ran on
 Murmuring so sweetly in themselves, obeyed
 A like dominion, and the midnight storm
 Grew darker in the presence of my eye. 
Hence my obeisance, my devotion hence,
 And hence my transport. 
Nor should this, perchance,
 Pass unrecorded, that I still had loved
 The exercise and produce of a toil
 Than analytic industry to me
 More pleasing, and whose character I deem
 Is more poetic, as resembling more
 Creative agency – I mean to speak
 Of that interminable building reared
 By observation of affinities
 In objects where no brotherhood exists
 To common minds. My seventeenth year was come,
 And, whether (from this habit rooted now
 So deeply in my mind, or from excess
 Of the great social principle of life
 Coercing all things into sympathy)
 To unorganic natures I transferred
 My own enjoyments, or (the power of truth
 Coming in revelation) I conversed
 With things that really are, I at this time
 Saw blessings spread around me like a sea. 
Thus did my days pass on, and now at length
 From Nature and her overflowing soul
 I had received so much that all my thoughts
 Were steeped in feeling. 
I was only then
 Contented when with bliss ineffable
 I felt the sentiment of being, spread
 O’er all that moves and all that seemeth still,
 O’er all that, lost beyond the reach of thought
 And human knowledge, to the human eye
 Invisible, yet liveth to the heart,
 O’er all that leaps, and runs, and shouts, and sings,
 Or beats the gladsome air, o’er all that glides
 Beneath the wave, yea, in the wave itself
 And mighty depth of waters. Wonder not
 If such my transports were, for in all things
 I saw one life, and felt that it was joy;
 One song they sang and it was audible –
 Most audible then when the fleshly ear,
 O’ercome by grosser prelude of that strain,
 Forgot its functions and slept undisturbed. 

If this be error, and another faith
 Find easier access to the pious mind,
 Yet were I grossly destitute of all
 Those human sentiments which make this earth
 So dear if I should fail with grateful voice
 To speak of you, ye mountains, and ye lakes
 And sounding cataracts, ye mists and winds
 That dwell among the hills where I was born. 
If in my youth I have been pure in heart,
 If, mingling with the world, I am content
 With my own modest pleasures, and have lived
 With God and Nature communing, removed
 From little enmities and low desires,
 The gift is yours! If, in these times of fear,
 This melancholy waste of hopes overthrown,
 If, mid indifference and apathy
 And wicked exultation, when good men
 On every side fall off we know not how
 To selfishness (disguised in gentle names
 Of peace and quiet and domestic love,
 Yet mingled, not unwillingly, with sneers
 On visionary minds) – if, in this time
 Of dereliction and dismay, I yet
 Despair not of our nature, but retain
 A more than Roman confidence, a faith
 That fails not, in all sorrow my support,
 The blessing of my life, the gift is yours
 Ye mountains, thine oh Nature! Thou hast fed
 My lofty speculations, and in thee,
 For this uneasy heart of ours, I find
 A never-failing principle of joy
 And purest passion. 
Thou, my friend, wast reared
 In the great city, mid far other scenes,
 But we by different roads at length have gained
 The self-same bourne. And from this cause to thee
 I speak unapprehensive of contempt,
 The insinuated scoff of coward tongues,
 And all that silent language which so oft
 In conversation betwixt man and man
 Blots from the human countenance all trace
 Of beauty and of love. For thou hast sought
 The truth in solitude, and thou art one
 The most intense of Nature’s worshippers,
 In many things my brother, chiefly here
 In this my deep devotion. 
Fare thee well! 
Health and the quiet of a healthful mind
 Attend thee, seeking oft the haunts of men –
 But yet more often living with thyself,
 And for thyself – so haply shall thy days
 Be many, and a blessing to mankind. 
