Moses.

Poem

Over the tent-peaks the sun was extending
Its slanting rays, its gleaming flames, the broad
Golden streaks that it leaves across the air when
It beds down in a sheet of desert sand.
Purple and gold appeared to drape the land.
Moses, the man of God, ascending barren
Mount Nebo’s summit, paused, and slowly eyed
The vast horizon with no sense of pride.
First he saw Pisgah flanked by fig trees; then,
Beyond the mountains that his gaze traversed,
All Gilead lay outspread, Ephraim, Manasseh,
Whose fertile land was on his right, while southward
Judah, immense and bare, displayed its sands
Where the great western sea was sleeping. In
The distance, in a valley dimmed by evening,
Olive-crowned Naphtali was visible;
On plains of sumptuous still flowers, Jericho,
The city of the palm trees, could be seen;
Mastic thickets reached from the plains of Peor
As far as Zoar. He could see all Canaan,
All of the promised land — where, he well knew,
He would not have a grave. He saw it all,
Stretched out his hand over the Israelites,
And then resumed his way toward the heights.

Now, the children of Israel, thronging round
The holy mountain's massive base, and covering
The far-flung plains of Moab, stirred within
The valley like thick wheat stirred by the gale.
At the hour when dew moistens the gold sand
And sets its pearls poised on the maples’ tips,
Moses, that centenarian prophet girded
With honor, had set out to seek the Lord.
By the light on his head they watched his progress,
And when he reached the mighty mountain’s summit,
When his brow pierced the divine cloud that crowned
The lofty peak with lightning, incense burned
On each stone altar. As low as the dust
Six hundred thousand Hebrews bowed, and sang
A sacred song with one voice in the shadow
Beneath the fragrant smoke gilded by sunlight.
The sons of Levi rose above the multitude
Like a cypress above the shifting sands;
Playing harps while the people sang, they led
The praises of the King of Kings to heaven.

Moses stood before God; he took his place,
And in the cloud spoke with him face to face.
“Am I to have no end?” he asked the Lord;
“Where do you wish my feet to wander now?
Must I live mighty and alone for ever?
Let me sleep with the slumber of the earth!
Why have you chosen me? What did I do?
I always led your people where you pleased,
And now their feet have reached the promised land.
Let someone else bridle the steed of Israel
And mediate between yourself and them;
My book and bronze rod I bequeath to him.

“Why was it necessary to dispel my hopes?
Why not leave me my human ignorance?
All the way from Mount Horeb to Mount Nebo,
I never found my burial place anywhere.
Ah, Lord! You made me wise among the wise men!
My hand guided the wandering people’s journeys;
I made fire rain upon the heads of kings;
The future will bow down before my laws;
I have opened the oldest human grave,
In my voice Death finds a prophetic voice,
I am exalted, nations lie beneath my feet,
My hand makes and unmakes the generations. —
Alas, Lord, I am mighty and alone,
Let me sleep with the slumber of the earth!

“Ah, Lord, I know the heavens’ secrets too;
You granted me the strength of your own eyes.
At my command the night tears off its veils;
My mouth numbers the stars, calls them by name,
And when I summon each one to the firmament,
It hastens there, declaring ‘Here I am.’
I set my two hands on the brows of clouds
And quench the springs of storms within their sides;
I bury cities under shifting sands;
With the wings of the wind I cast down mountains;
My never-wearied feet have conquered space;
Mighty rivers subside when I go by,
And the sea’s voice is silenced by my own.
Whenever my flock need laws or are suffering
And I lift up my eyes, your Spirit visits me;
Then the sun falters and the earth is shaken;
Your angels marvel, and they envy me.
And yet I have no happiness, Lord; you
Have made me grow old mighty and alone
Let me sleep with the slumber of the earth!

“When your breath filled the shepherd, men declared
Among themselves, ‘He is not one of us’;
Before my eyes of flame, their eyes were downcast,
Because they saw something beyond my soul.
So I watched friendship wither and love perish;
The virgins veiled themselves and feared to die.
I walked before them all, sad and alone
In glory, shrouded by the cloud’s dark pillar,
And said within my heart, ‘What now?’ My head
Is too burdened to sleep on any bosom,
My hand terrifies any hand it touches.
My voice is thunder, and my lips shed lightning;
Instead of loving me, people merely tremble;
When I open my arms, they fall before my feet.
I have spent my life mighty and alone,
Let me sleep with the slumber of the earth!”

The waiting people prayed, but did not look on
The mount, fearing the wrath of the jealous God;
For if they raised their eyes, the cloud’s dark sides
Rolled and resounded with a storm of thunder,
And lightning flashes blinded their gaze, forcing
All the heads in the crowd to bow down. Soon
The mountaintop reappeared, without Moses.
They mourned him. — Joshua, moving toward
The promised land, grew pale and started to reflect:
He was already the Almighty Lord’s elect.
