Visions of the Daughters of Albion

Visions

Enslaved, the Daughters of Albion weep – a trembling lamentation
 Upon their mountains, in their valleys sighs toward America. 
For the soft soul of America, Oothoon, wandered in woe
 Along the vales of Leutha, seeking flowers to comfort her,
 And thus she spoke to the bright Marygold of Leutha’s vale:
 ‘Art thou a flower? Art thou a nymph? I see thee now a flower,
 Now a nymph! I dare not pluck thee from thy dewy bed.’ 
The golden nymph replied: ‘Pluck thou my flower, Oothoon the mild. 
Another flower shall spring, because the soul of sweet delight
 Can never pass away.’ She ceased and closed her golden shrine. 
Then Oothoon plucked the flower saying, ‘I pluck thee from thy bed,
 Sweet flower, and put thee here to glow between my breasts,
 And thus I turn my face to where my whole soul seeks.’ 
Over the waves she went in winged exulting swift delight,
 And over Theotormon’s reign, took her impetuous course. 
Bromion rent her with his thunders. On his stormy bed
 Lay the faint maid, and soon her woes appalled his thunders hoarse. 
Bromion spoke: ‘Behold this harlot here on Bromion’s bed,
 And let the jealous dolphins sport around the lovely maid! 
Thy soft American plains are mine, and mine thy north and south. 
Stamped with my signet are the swarthy children of the sun –
 They are obedient, they resist not, they obey the scourge,
 Their daughters worship terrors and obey the violent! 
Now thou mayst marry Bromion’s harlot and protect the child
 Of Bromion’s rage that Oothoon shall put forth in nine moons time.’ 
Then storms rent Theotormon’s limbs; he rolled his waves around
 And folded his black jealous waters round the adulterate pair. 
Bound back to back in Bromion’s caves, terror and meekness dwell;
 At entrance Theotormon sits, wearing the threshold hard
 With secret tears. Beneath him sound like waves on a desert-shore
 The voice of slaves beneath the sun, and children bought with money
 That shiver in religious caves beneath the burning fires
 Of lust that belch incessant, from the summits of the earth. 
Oothoon weeps not. She cannot weep – her tears are locked up –
 But she can howl incessant writhing her soft snowy limbs
 And calling Theotormon’s eagles to prey upon her flesh:
 ‘I call with holy voice, kings of the sounding air! 
Rend away this defiled bosom that I may reflect
 The image of Theotormon on my pure transparent breast.’ 
The eagles at her call descend and rend their bleeding prey;
 Theotormon severely smiles. Her soul reflects the smile,
 As the clear spring, muddied with feet of beasts, grows pure and smiles. 
The Daughters of Albion hear her woes, and echo back her sighs. 
‘Why does my Theotormon sit weeping upon the threshold
 And Oothoon hovers by his side, persuading him in vain? 
I cry “arise”, oh Theotormon, for the village dog
 Barks at the breaking day, the nightingale has done lamenting,
 The lark does rustle in the ripe corn, and the eagle returns
 From nightly prey and lifts his golden beak to the pure east,
 Shaking the dust from his immortal pinions to awake
 The sun that sleeps too long. Arise, my Theotormon, I am pure –
 Because the night is gone that closed me in its deadly black. 
They told me that the night and day were all that I could see,
 They told me that I had five senses to inclose me up,
 And they inclosed my infinite brain into a narrow circle
 And sunk my heart into the abyss, a red round globe hot burning –
 Till all from life I was obliterated and erased. 
Instead of morn arises a bright shadow like an eye
 In the eastern cloud, instead of night a sickly charnel-house,
 That Theotormon hears me not! To him the night and morn
 Are both alike – a night of sighs, a morning of fresh tears –
 And none but Bromion can hear my lamentations. 
With what sense is it that the chicken shuns the ravenous hawk? 
With what sense does the tame pigeon measure out the expanse? 
With what sense does the bee form cells? Have not the mouse and frog
 Eyes and ears and sense of touch – yet are their habitations
 And their pursuits as different as their forms and as their joys? 
Ask the wild ass why he refuses burdens, and the meek camel
 Why he loves man. Is it because of eye, ear, mouth, or skin,
 Or breathing nostrils? No, for these the wolf and tiger have. 
Ask the blind worm the secrets of the grave, and why her spires
 Love to curl round the bones of death, and ask the ravenous snake
 Where she gets poison, and the winged eagle why he loves the sun –
 And then tell me the thoughts of man, that have been hid of old. 
Silent I hover all the night, and all day could be silent
 If Theotormon once would turn his loved eyes upon me. 
How can I be defiled when I reflect thy image pure? 
Sweetest the fruit that the worm feeds on, and the soul preyed on by woe,
 The new-washed lamb tinged with the village smoke, and the bright swan
 By the red earth of our immortal river. I bathe my wings,
 And I am white and pure to hover round Theotormon’s breast.’ 
Then Theotormon broke his silence, and he answered:
 ‘Tell me what is the night or day to one o’erflowed with woe! 
Tell me what is a thought, and of what substance is it made! 
Tell me what is a joy, and in what gardens do joys grow! 
And in what rivers swim the sorrows, and upon what mountains
 Wave shadows of discontent, and in what houses dwell the wretched
 Drunken with woe, forgotten and shut up from cold despair? 
Tell me where dwell the thoughts forgotten till thou call them forth! 
Tell me where dwell the joys of old, and where the ancient loves,
 And when will they renew again, and the night of oblivion past –
 That I might traverse times and spaces far remote and bring
 Comforts into a present sorrow, and a night of pain. 
Where goest thou, oh thought, to what remote land is thy flight? 
If thou returnest to the present moment of affliction
 Wilt thou bring comforts on thy wings, and dews and honey and balm,
 Or poison from the desert wilds, from the eyes of the envier?’ 
Then Bromion said, and shook the cavern with his lamentation:
 ‘Thou knowest that the ancient trees seen by thine eyes have fruit,
 But knowest thou that trees and fruits flourish upon the earth
 To gratify senses unknown – trees, beasts and birds, unknown –
 Unknown not unperceived, spread in the infinite microscope
 In places yet unvisited by the voyager, and in worlds
 Over another kind of seas, and in atmospheres unknown? 
Ah, are there other wars beside the wars of sword and fire? 
And are there other sorrows beside the sorrows of poverty? 
And are there other joys beside the joys of riches and ease? 
And is there not one law for both the lion and the ox? 
And is there not eternal fire, and eternal chains,
 To bind the phantoms of existence from eternal life?’ 
Then Oothoon waited silent all the day and all the night,
 But when the morn arose, her lamentation renewed. 
The Daughters of Albion hear her woes, and echo back her sighs. 
‘Oh Urizen, creator of men, mistaken demon of Heaven,
 Thy joys are tears, thy labour vain to form men to thine image! 
How can one joy absorb another? Are not different joys
 Holy, eternal, infinite? – and each joy is a love. 
Does not the great mouth laugh at a gift, and the narrow eyelids mock
 At the labour that is above payment – and wilt thou take the ape
 For thy councilor, or the dog for a schoolmaster to thy children? 
Does he who condemns poverty, and he who turns with abhorrence
 From usury, feel the same passion, or are they moved alike? 
How can the giver of gifts experience the delights of the merchant,
 How the industrious citizen the pains of the husbandman? 
How different far the fat-fed hireling with hollow drum,
 Who buys whole cornfields into wastes, and sings upon the heath –
 How different their eye and ear, how different the world to them! 
With what sense does the parson claim the labour of the farmer? 
What are his nets and gins and traps, and how does he surround him
 With cold floods of abstraction and with forests of solitude,
 To build him castles and high spires where kings and priests may dwell,
 Till she who burns with youth and knows no fixed lot is bound
 In spells of law to one she loathes? And must she drag the chain
 Of life in weary lust? Must chilling murderous thoughts obscure
 The clear heaven of her eternal spring – to bear the wintry rage
 Of a harsh terror, driven to madness, bound to hold a rod
 Over her shrinking shoulders all the day, and all the night
 To turn the wheel of false desire, and longings that wake her womb
 To the abhorred birth of cherubs in the human form
 That live a pestilence, and die a meteor, and are no more –
 Till the child dwell with one he hates, and do the deed he loathes,
 And the impure scourge force his seed into its unripe birth
 E’er yet his eyelids can behold the arrows of the day. 
Does the whale worship at thy footsteps as the hungry dog,
 Or does he scent the mountain prey because his nostrils wide
 Draw in the ocean? Does his eye discern the flying cloud
 As the raven’s eye, or does he measure the expanse like the vulture? 
Does the still spider view the cliffs where eagles hide their young,
 Or does the fly rejoice because the harvest is brought in? 
Does not the eagle scorn the earth and despise the treasures beneath –
 But the mole knoweth what is there, and the worm shall tell it thee. 
Does not the worm erect a pillar in the mouldering churchyard,
 And a place of eternity in the jaws of the hungry grave? 
Over his porch these words are written: “Take thy bliss oh man,
 And sweet shall be thy taste and sweet thy infant joys renew.” 
Infancy, fearless, lustful, happy, nestling for delight
 In laps of pleasure! Innocence, honest, open, seeking
 The vigorous joys of morning-light, open to virgin bliss! 
Who taught thee modesty, subtle modesty, child of night and sleep? 
When thou awakest wilt thou dissemble all thy secret joys,
 Or wert thou not awake when all this mystery was disclosed? 
Then comest thou forth a modest virgin, knowing to dissemble,
 With nets found under thy night-pillow to catch virgin joy,
 And brand it with the name of whore and sell it in the night
 In silence, even without a whisper, and in seeming sleep. 
Religious dreams and holy vespers light thy smoky fires:
 Once were thy fires lighted by the eyes of honest morn. 
And does my Theotormon seek this hypocrite modesty –
 This knowing, artful, secret, fearful, cautious, trembling hypocrite? 
Then is Oothoon a whore indeed, and all the virgin joys
 Of life are harlots, and Theotormon is a sick man’s dream,
 And Oothoon is the crafty slave of selfish holiness! 
But Oothoon is not so – a virgin filled with virgin fancies
 Open to joy and to delight wherever beauty appears! 
If in the morning sun I find it, there my eyes are fixed
 In happy copulation; if in evening mild, wearied with work,
 Sit on a bank and draw the pleasures of this free-born joy. 
The moment of desire! The moment of desire! The virgin
 That pines for man shall awaken her womb to enormous joys
 In the secret shadows of her chamber. The youth shut up from
 The lustful joy shall forget to generate, and create an amorous image
 In the shadows of his curtains, and in the folds of his silent pillow. 
Are not these the places of religion, the rewards of continence,
 The self-enjoyings of self-denial? Why dost thou seek religion? 
Is it because acts are not lovely that thou seekest solitude,
 Where the horrible darkness is impressed with reflections of desire? 
Father of Jealousy, be thou accursed from the earth! 
Why hast thou taught my Theotormon this accurséd thing? 
Till beauty fades from off my shoulders, darkened and cast out,
 A solitary shadow wailing on the margin of non-entity. 
I cry, love! love! love! Happy, happy love, free as the mountain wind! 
Can that be love that drinks another as a sponge drinks water –
 That clouds with jealousy his nights, with weepings all the day,
 To spin a web of age around him, grey and hoary, dark,
 Till his eyes sicken at the fruit that hangs before his sight? 
Such is self-love that envies all, a creeping skeleton
 With lamplike eyes watching around the frozen marriage-bed. 
But silken nets and traps of adamant will Oothoon spread,
 And catch for thee girls of mild silver, or of furious gold! 
I’ll lie beside thee on a bank and view their wanton play
 In lovely copulation, bliss on bliss with Theotormon. 
Red as the rosy morning, lustful as the first-born beam,
 Oothoon shall view his dear delight, nor e’er with jealous cloud
 Come in the heaven of generous love, nor selfish blightings bring. 
Does the sun walk in glorious raiment on the secret floor
 Where the cold miser spreads his gold? Or does the bright cloud drop
 On his stone threshold? Does his eye behold the beam that brings
 Expansion to the eye of pity? Or will he bind himself
 Beside the ox to thy hard furrow? Does not that mild beam blot
 The bat, the owl, the glowing tiger, and the king of night? 
The sea-fowl takes the wintry blast for a covering to her limbs,
 And the wild snake the pestilence to adorn him with gems and gold –
 And trees and birds and beasts and men behold their eternal joy. 
Arise you little glancing wings, and sing your infant joy! 
Arise and drink your bliss, for every thing that lives is holy!’ 
Thus every morning wails Oothoon. But Theotormon sits
 Upon the margined ocean conversing with shadows dire. 
The Daughters of Albion hear her woes, and echo back her sighs. 
