Konrad Wallenrod

[‘Song of the Wajdelota’ (excerpt)]

Whene’er the plague toward Lithuania turns,
 The wajdelota’s eye her doom foresees;
 For, if the bard relate his tale aright,
 Oft o’er the empty graveyards and broad leas
 The Maid of Pestilence walks, robed in white:
 About her brow a fiery garland burns;
 Taller than Bialowieza’s trees she stands,
 And waves a blood-stained kerchief in her hands. 

On castle walls the sentries on their round
 Behind their visors fain would hide their eyes;
 In village lanes the dogs, with dismal cries,
 Dig, scenting death, their muzzles to the ground. 

The maiden paces on with steps of doom
 Through many a village, castle, and rich town;
 But where she casts her bloody kerchief down,
 The palaces are sunk in desert gloom;
 Where treads her foot, there rises a fresh tomb. 

Ah; devastating phantom! – but a loss
 Far deadlier shadows forth the casque that shines,
 The plume that waves beyond the German lines,
 And the broad mantle, blackened with the cross! 
Where such an apparition has stalked by,
 None says, ‘Here was a castle, there a town;’
 The whole land in one grave is sunken down. 
If there be any who can yet defy
 That specter – if there still be one to keep
 A Lithuanian soul – come to me now! 
Above the grave of nations let us bow;
 There we will ponder, there will sing and weep. 

Saga! thou ark of that most holy plight
 Between the years of yore and younger years,
 In thee the folk lays armor of its knight,
 Fabric of thoughts, blossoms of joy and tears. 

Ark! thou canst not be broken, while thine own
 Take heed of thee! O folk song? thou dost stand
 On guard before the nation’s inmost shrine
 Of memory, and wings and voice are thine
 Of an archangel – but not these alone,
 For an archangel’s sword is in thy hand. 

The flames will gnaw away a painted tale;
 The fruits of conquest, vandals will despoil:
 The song unscathed springs from the murk and moil,
 And, if the sordid souls who hear it, fail
 To give it food of grief and drink of hope,
 It cleaves to ruins, seeks the rugged slope,
 And thence mourns ever for the ancient days. 
Thus flies the nightingale forth from the blaze
 And on the burning gables fain would rest;
 When the roofs fall, she flees to wooded hills,
 And over graves, with her sonorous breast,
 The pilgrim’s lonely path with mourning fills. 

I have heard songs: a peasant, bent and gray,
 When his iron plowshare struck forgotten bones,
 Has paused, upon his willow flute to play
 A requiem; or, with impassioned tones,
 To raise a chant for you, O ancient sires,
 Who have no sons to tend your altar fires! 
The echoes made responses far and clear:
 I grieved the more, that I alone could hear. 
As the archangel on the day of doom
 Calls forth the dead past from its sunken tomb,
 So, at the song, the bones beneath my feet
 Fused into giant forms; from heaps of stone
 Columns and ceilings rose again complete,
 A thousand oars stirred the deserted lake,
 Wide open were the doors of castles thrown:
 There did the minstrels sing, the maidens dance,
 The light from princely crowns and armor glance –
 Bravely I dreamt, and cruelly did awake. 
Gone are the forests, gone the ancestral peaks;
 Thought, flying back, her wonted refuge seeks,
 As homes the wearied dove upon spent wings. 
In listless hands the lute no longer rings;
 Seldom the voice of old can I divine
 Through Lithuanian lips, that but repine. 
But still the sparks of youthful ardor glow
 Deep in my breast, and often kindle there
 The flames that warm my soul and brighter show
 The scenes of old. For memory, like a rare
 Crystalline globe of intricate design,
 Though filmed with dust and scratches, if one set
 A candle in its heart, again will shine
 With limpid color; once again will throw
 On palace walls a fair and delicate net,
 Though somewhat blurred and darkened, radiant yet. 
If only I could pour out mine own fire
 Into my hearers’ breasts; could I inspire
 A second life in phantoms of old time;
 Could I but pierce with ringing shafts of rhyme
 My brothers’ hearts – in that one moment when
 Their fathers’ song aroused them, they might know
 The ancient stirring of the heart, the old
 Elation of the soul; one moment then
 Might they be lifted up, as free and bold
 As lived and died their fathers, long ago. 
But why for ages that are vanished yearn? 
The bard will not belittle his own day;
 A hero liveth yet, not far away:
 Of him I sing – ye men of Litwa, learn! 

The old man hushed his lute, and paused to see
 Whether the Germans would forbid that song;
 The thrall of silence held the knightly throng,
 Silence, more eloquent than praise can be. 
So he began anew; the story ran
 In slower cadences, of other things;
 With faint, infrequent chords he smote the strings;
 Ended the hymn, a simple tale began. 
