The Poet

I

Let him go in peace, through a world unaware of him;
Respect his noble griefs, this grand and wretched man
Whom his own soul devours!
Flee, O vain pleasures, his austere existence;
His growing palm, jealous and solitary,
Cannot thrive among your flowers.

He suffers evils enough without adding your joys!
Each step that thrusts him into sublime paths
Is numbered by an agony.
He weeps at his youth taking flight before old age,
His life, humble reed, which bends, overwhelmed
With the weight of immortality.

He weeps, O lovely childhood, at your grace and charms,
And your innocent smile and your naive tears,
Your gentle and turbulent joy,
And, far from the vast skies, the wing you let rest,
And, in your noisy games, your crown of roses
Which your burning brow would destroy.

He blames his epoch, and his songs, and his lyre,
And the euphoric cup where, betraying his frenzy,
Glory pours out so much gall,
And his vows, pursuing baneful promises,
And his heart, and his Muse, and all those heavenly gifts,
Which are not heaven at all!

II

Ah! If only, as he lies in life’s chariot,
His sleep were not troubled by envious cries
And the hymns of triumph he won!
If he could work forgotten on his memorial!
Or, veiled with rays, could hide in his glory
Like an angel in the sun!

But he must ever follow, in the public arena,
The crowd that rebuffs him and the crowd that adores.
He is disturbed at their command!
His grave voice is lost amid their idle talk,
And their foolish pride mingles their frivolous games
With the sceptre in his hand!

Why do they drag this king so far from his kingdom?
Does a giant need a retinue of midgets?
Sons of the world, it is you he avoids.
What is your ephemeral realm to an immortal?
With no songs of his voice or sounds of his lyre,
Don’t you still have plenty of noise?

III

Let him rest in his shadow where the light descends. —
Do you know that a Muse, refining his dust there,
In secret eases his plight?
And that, leaving for his sake the eternal feast,
The dove of Christ and the eagle of the Prophets
Often visit him by night?

His arduous vigil, in his holy visions, sees
Where rising suns and fading spheres throughout the sky
In multitudes have come and gone,
And, tracking in space the bright archangels’ choir,
Seeks to know, in distant worlds, what alien forms
Universal Being puts on.

Do you know that his eyes have glances of flame?
Do you know that the veil spread over his soul
Is never lifted in vain?
Gilded with light and flushed with holy fire
His wing, in an instant, from this infernal rite
Can mount to the feast divine.

So stay far away from him, impudent mortals,
Him whom the Lord has marked among his brothers
With this sign of beauty and doom,
And whose eye has a glimpse of more dark mysteries
Than the frightened dead might read in the shadows
Under the stone on their tomb!

IV

A day comes when the Muse herself will send him,
His exalted lute armed with a sacred mission,
Into the world that thirsts for blood,
So he, to rescue us from our own rashness, S
May bring down from on high to threatening man
The prayer of Almighty God.

A formidable spirit comes into his thought.
He appears, and suddenly, his words in flashes
Shine like a burning bough.
The people crowd around him, prostrate at his feet;
Mysterious Sinai and its lightnings crown him,
A very God is on his brow.
