To the Sun: A Hymn.

Stop and listen to me, O Sun, I salute you and, ecstatic before you, I dare to address you. My imagination, like you, burns and it is carried away in a fever and in admiration of you, and guides its wings towards you intrepidly. Would that my powerful accents, resounding sublimely, surpassing the frightened voice of the fearful thunderclap, O Sun, reach up to you and that you would pause in the middle of your transit! Ah! If only the flame that lights up my mind were also to give ardour to my senses, and my longing eyes were to rise up to the conquering ray that dazzles them, and were to fix them, gazing ceaselessly and with daring on your brilliant face. How long have I loved you, O refulgent Sun! With what simple desire, as an innocent child, did I long to follow you in the extended heavens and watched you ecstatically and grew fascinated in the contemplation of your light! August sovereign, you stretch out in pomp the fringes of your fiery apparel from the golden limits of the Orient, which the rich Ocean girdles with pearls, to the shadowy limit of the West, and you bathe the world in your pure light. Vivid, you launch the day from your brow and, soul and life of the world, your disc sends, in peace, placid fecund warmth, and you raise yourself up in triumph, the scintillating crown of the orbs. Tranquilly you rise from the golden zenith to the royal throne in the centre of the heavens, adorned with living flames and splendour, and you curb your flight. Andfrom thence you rapidly descend in your refulgent course and, trembling, you tremulously shake your rich burning tresses in the bosom of the sea and your splendour is hidden and eternity buries the day that has passed with other thousand days. How many centuries without end, how many have you seen slide into the unfathomable abyss! What pomp, grandeur and power and populous empires have vanished! What existed before you? The dry and light leaves snatched from the dark wood which swirl in circles disappear at the fury of the North Wind. You were freed from the divine rage, you were witness to the drowning of the entire universe when the waters, thrust by the righteous arm of Jehovah, were cast down, and the tempest roared and the seas were hurled by the winds; the hoarse thunder boomed all around, and in fear the diamond pivots of the Earth creaked; mountains and meadows became mutinous seas, the tomb of mankind. The deep shuddered and then you, like the Lord of the world, raised up your throne over the tempest, dressed in darkness, and you paraded your face, and you shone on other worlds in peace. And you saw, once more, new centuries, new peoples come, flee, disappear in an eternal whirlwind, just as the waves of the Ocean come, break and flee and come again and again; while you, unchanging, alone and radiant, O Sun!, continuously rise up and triumph over a thousand ages and a thousand traces. And are you to be eternal, inextinguishable, so that your immense fire will never lose its radiance, never tiring, audaciously following your immortal course, contemplating the disappearance of ages and alone, eternal, perennial, sublime, dominating as a powerful monarch? No; for death, even if it stalks you from afar, no less desiring pursues you. Who knows that if, perhaps, you are the pale flash of another sun which from another greater univers than ours once shone with double brilliance? Enjoy your youth and your beauty O Sun!, for when the dread day comes when the orb explodes and slips from the potent hand of the Sovereign Father and, there, too, you will fall into eternity, fragmented into a thousand horrible din of a hundred storms your pure flame will die amid endless darkness. Gloomy night will cover for eternity the heavenly firmament; and not a trace of your light will remain!

