My homeland

In the album of my friend João d'Aboim.

My land has not the crests
 Of those fountains of Portugal alone,
 My land has no willows,
 It has only waves of white sand. 

In its fields the jasmine does not sprout,
 It hath not blossomed in its meadows,
 It has no roses of fine crimson,
 It has only steep hills of clay. 

It has no gentle trilling - mournful
 Of the soft, gentle nightingale,
 It has the soft, longing song
 Of Benguella in her sunshine,

Spring is not so bright
 As Europe only infiltrates us,
 No lascivious, incessant breeze,
 I've got nothing but sunbeams to burn. 

It has no fruits offered by God,
 And, like the mimosa of a Portuguese clod,
 It has no rivers sung by Bardos,
 Like the river Mondego, in Ignez's deeds. 

It has no glory deeds that the world can proudly
 To the world to boast of,
 And if it has, who can make it so? 
And if it has, who will write it down? -

It has palm-trees of copious shade
 Where the wild tribu's Sóba,
 In the ravine of weary people,
 Sleeps thirsty of breeze. 

With the deserts 'towering cliffs
 There nestles a thirsty lion
 In thirsty lairs of open thorns
 Where he rests haughtily on the ground. 

In these mountains he roams tirelessly,
 The zagaia with vibrating strength,
 The warrior and famous African
 At his feet the panthereum prostrate. 

No virgin with snowy cheeks
 To whom spears grieve Donzel,
 He hath maidens of very brief plant,
 Very airy, with a faithful breast. 

His love is like a silver fountain
 Where those who mirror in it can see
 The sweetness of the dove that exalts,
 The haughtiness, which faith resembles. 

It's the same with me, and the same with you,
 I'm not to be outdone, but I'm to be trusted,
 It's all the same to me,
 In perjury revenge crackles. 

He knows how to love! - But he has not the culture
 Of those wizard's lips to bloom;
 His face is painted with sadness,
 His eyes have sweet lusciousness. 

My land has not the crests
 Of those fountains of Portugal alone;
 My land has no willows,
 It has only waves of white sand. 

It has no gods inspired Vates,
 Who could decant a Gama, a Moniz,
 Who in their deeds with won blondes
 And, like a man of the cloth, I'll not forget him. 

And, like a man of his own free will
 To the poet the divine mission,
 And, like a man who, like a man who
 With boast, and with wizard's condon. 

If it were so - the African Vate -
 I'm not to be trifled with, but I'm to be trusted
 Who first in the toasted plains
 I'm not to be trifled with, I'm to be trifled with. 

I'm not to be trifled with - I'm not to be trifled with
 I'm not to be trifled with, but I'm to be trifled with,
 Who in the shouts of war unleashed
 I'll have no fear, for I'll have no fear, for I'll have no fear. 

A Count Barcellos had decanted,
 A lord Fernando de Bragança,
 Who to the Moors had borne cities,
 That, in the wars of Tunis, was a man of valor. 

He had ruled in the wars of Tunis,
 Of Granada, Morocco, and Fez,
 And, like a man of the cloth, the man of the cloth
 I'm not to be outdone, but I'm to be outdone. 

I'm a man of my own free will,
 And, like a man of the cloth, a man of the cloth
 Who first brought to the fatherland
 I'm not to be denied, I'm not to be denied. 

I'm not to be denied, but I'm to be trusted. 
And, like a man of the cloth, a man of the cloth
 In a swamp he swam to his death
 And, like a man of the cloth, I'll never forget it. 

I'll have them all! - But what, my land
 But, my land, has no God-inspired vate;
 It is not the homeland of the divo Camões
 So poet, so brave a soldier. 

It's not the homeland of America's champions
 Who in your songs, with wondrous harmony
 On Tijuca's summit, seated
 You rested in such beautiful poetry. 

It has none; for in the land of Africa
 There is no Cysne in gentle Guanabara,
 More mimosa, more beautiful, and more rich
 Than the gold of my Ouangára. 

My land has no trees
 As leafy, shady, and beautiful
 And, like your own, in laughing Palmella,
 All wrapped in their green hair. 

No humble waves kissing
 The verges of those lofty mountains
 Which sometimes, soft as they are, do not groan, but sigh,
 And now they roar - beaten by winds. 

My land has not the granite
 And the greenness of your pristine Cintra
 That love'd his heartfelt speeches of love
 And, like a child, I'm not to be outdone. 

My native land has nothing
 That makes me ecstatic and exquisite,
 Nothing but the deserts of the deserts
 And, like a man of the world, I'll never forget it. 

Even so rude, without art's finery,
 Nor of nature's pampering and beauties,
 That in fields a thousand to a thousand always flourish,
 Is my homeland! 
My homeland for whom I long
 So many longings that my breast gnaws,
 And with such vivid force as you felt,
 When on Tijuca's lofty summit
 Meditating you wrote in sad verses,
 Verses I loved so much, and love still,
 The longing for your loving homes! 
It's my homeland, I tell you! 
I've seen it first, and in it the sun's light
 The sunlight, though burning bright and strong. 
My childhood days there returned
 In time to my most exquisite heart,
 In those happy days, when just
 To the world awake, I saw and heard
 My lips were kissed by kisses of pure love
 The kisses of pure love, born of the soul
 Of a most loving and beautiful Mother's soul! 

And there, by a voice soft and holy, I heard and
 I heard and believed in God! It's my homeland! 

And you well-fated Poet
 Who in gentle Guanabára
 You have sung so many songs
 To your fair homeland,
 Receive this song of mine
 Of bitterness and mourning,
 Without beauty, without charm. 
To my homeland so dear. 

I saw the beauty of the land
 Of your land without equal,
 I saw much of what's within
 Your beautiful Portugal;
 And if I envy the beauty
 I've seen the beauty of your land,
 It is also very Portuguese
 My native land. 

With glory I bear in my breast
 I'm so proud that I'm not to blame,
 That I know not what has befallen
 I'm not sure what to do with its fortune's foreshadowing. 
And still sleeps indolently,
 And, like a man who's not in his right mind,
 That there'll come a mighty rise
 I'm not so sure that I'm right. 

I also envy Brazil
 On the shining waters,
 In those fields a thousand and a thousand,
 In those mountains beyond the sea. 
I envy the beauty
 Of those meadows of greenery,
 Inspiring with sweetness
 The Poet descanting. 

There is nothing of my native land
 That ecstasies and reveals pride,
 Nothing but deserts
 That is so grateful to the singer. 

And you well-fated Poet
 That in gentle Guanabara
 To your homeland so dear
 You have sung so many songs
 Receive my song too
 Of bitterness and tears
 Without beauty, without enchantment,
 For my soul to you! 
