Hymns to the Night

[5]

Over the widespread races of men in former times there ruled an iron fate with mute power. A dark, heavy chain lay around their anxious souls. — The earth was infinite — the gods’ residence, and their home. For all eternity their secret structure stood. Over the red mountains of the morning, in the holy lap of the sea, dwelled the sun, the all-kindling living light.

An ancient giant carried the blessed world. Held fast under mountains lay the first sons of Mother Earth, powerless in their destructive fury against the splendid new race of gods and their relatives, the happy mortals. The dark, green depths of the sea were the lap of a goddess. In crystal grottoes feasted a luxurious folk. Rivers, trees, flowers, and animals had human spirits. The wine tasted sweeter as the gift of an image of blooming youth — a god in the grapes — a loving, motherly goddess, growing upwards in full, golden sheaves — the holy drunkenness of love a sweet service of the loveliest lady of the gods — an endless bright festival of heaven’s children and earthdwellers streamed like a springtime through the centuries. — Childlike, all races worshipped the tender thousandfold flame as the highest in the world. There was but one thought, one horrible dream image:


The dreadful thing approached the cheerful table
And buried every heart in frantic fears.
The gods themselves could utter nothing helpful,
To soothe the fearful breasts with wisdom’s balm.
Mysterious the path this brute had taken,
Whose fury no appeal or gift could calm;
It was Death who broke apart this joyous revel
With anxious dread and bitter pain and tears.

Forever now from all things separated
That here can bring the heart sweet happiness,
Cut off from loved ones here below whose longings
Are stirred by vain desire and misery,
Dull dreams to the dead one seemed apportioned:
He had to suffer pointless agony.
Shattered was the wave of endless pleasure
On the sharp rock of endless bitterness.

With daring verve and lofty warmth of feeling
Men made more beautiful that loathsome sight;
The light a gentle youth would now extinguish —
The end was gentle, like a harpstring’s sound.
Remembrance melts in the cool flood of shadows:
So sang the song to those in sadness bound.
Yet endless night would still remain unfathomed,
The solemn emblem of a distant might.
The ancient world inclined to its end. The pleasure garden of the youthful race withered away — up into the freer barren space strove the unchildlike, maturing people. The gods vanished with their followers — Lonely and lifeless nature stood. Arid number and strict measure bound her in iron chains. The immeasurable bloom of life fell away in dark words as if in dust and air. Fled and gone were god-invoking faith and its all-transforming, all-relating heavenly comrade imagination. A cold unfriendly north wind blew over the frozen plain, and the frozen magic homeland flew off into the aether. The far reaches of heaven were filled with shining worlds. Into a deeper sanctuary, into higher spaces of the mind, the soul of the world withdrew with her powers — to reign there until the daybreak of world splendor. Light was no longer the dwelling of the gods and their sign — they threw the veil of night over them. Night became the mighty womb of revelation — the gods returned to it — and went to sleep, in order to go out again in new and splendid forms over the altered world. To a people despised above all, ripe too early and stubbornly estranged from the blessed guiltlessness of youth, the new world appeared with a countenance never seen before — In the poverty of a poetic hut — A son of the first virgin and mother — Eternal fruit of a mysterious embrace. The prescient and flourishing wisdom of the east was the first to recognize the beginning of the new age — A star showed it the way to the humble cradle of the king. In the name of the far future they paid homage to him with gleaming and fragrant things, the highest wonders of nature. In solitude the heav - enly heart unfolded into a blossom-chalice of all-powerful love — turned toward his father’s lofty countenance and rest - ing on the bosom, blessed with foresight, of his lovely, earnest mother. With fires of adoration the prophetic eye of the blooming child looked to future days, and on his beloved ones, the shoots of the divine trunk, undisturbed over the earthly fate of his days. Soon the most childlike souls gathered so around him, wondrously seized with inner love. Like flowers a new and strange life sprang up around him. Inexhaustible words and the happiest of tidings fell like sparks of a divine spirit from his comforting lips. From distant shores, born under the serene skies of Hellas, a singer came to Palestine and devoted his whole heart to the miraculous child:


You are the youth who for a long time
Has stood on our graves with thoughts deep in mind;
A sign of comfort in the darkness —
The joyful start of higher humankind.
What once had cast us deep in sadness,
Now draws us out with yearning in our soul.
In death, eternal life is now made known,
You are death, and the first to make us whole.
Full of joy the singer travelled to Hindustan — his heart drunk with sweet love; and poured it out in fiery songs under that mild sky, so that a thousand hearts turned to him, and the happy tidings grew upward in a thousand branches. Soon after the singer’s departure the precious life became a sacrifice for the deep decay of humankind — He died in his youth, torn away from the beloved world, the weeping mother, and his fearful friends. His dear mouth emptied the dark chalice of unspeakable suffering — In terrible dread the hour of the birth of the new world drew near. He wrestled hard with the terrors of old death — heavy lay the weight of the old world upon him. Once more he looked fondly toward his mother — then came the loosening hand of eternal love — and he went to sleep.

For only a few days a deep veil hung over the roaring sea and the quaking land — the beloved ones shed countless tears — - the myatrry was unsealed — heavenly spirits raised the age-old stone from the grave. Angels sat by the sleeping one - formed tenderly from his dreams — Awakened in new godlike glory he mounted to the heights of the newborn world — with his own hand buried the old corpse in the for - saken cave and with almighty hand he laid the stone on it that no power may raise.

Your loved ones still weep tears of joy, deep-felt tears of unending thanks ar your grave — still see you always, in fearful joy, rising up - and they with you; see you weeping with sweet fervor at the mother's blessed breast, walking solemnly with your friends, saying words as if broken from the tree of life; see you hasten full of longing into the father’s arms, bringing the young humankind, and the golden future’s inexhaustible cup. The mother soon hastened after you — in heavenly triumph — site was the first in the new homeland with you. Long ages have (lowed away since then, and in ever higher brightness vom new i rear ion moved — and because of pain and anguish thousands followed after you full of yearning, faith, and devo - non and rule with you and the heavenly virgin in the kingdom of love — serve in the temple of heavenly death and are yours in eternity.


Raised up is the stone —
And risen humankind —
With you we all abide
And no more feel the chain.
The harshest griefs now flee
Before your golden grail,
When earth and life subside
At die last evening meal.

Death calls us to the wedding —
The lamps are blazing forth —
The virgins are all present —
Of oil there is no dearth —
Oh let the distance echo
With the coming of your train.
And let the stars now call us
With tongue and tone humane.

To you are lifted, Mary,
A thousand hearts anew,
For in this life of shadows
They only long for you.
They seek rejuvenation
With hopeful joy and trust.
Oh press them, holy being,
To your faithful breast.

So many once were burning,
Consumed in bitter grief,
But from this world escaping
In you they found relief;
They came to us with comfort
For torment and despair —
As we come now to join them
To be eternal there.

No one with loving faith now
Weeps anguished at a grave.
No one will lose the sweetness
Of the gift that love once gave.
Now Night sends inspiration
To soothe the one who wept —
By heaven's faithful children
His heart is closely kept.

Our life toward life eternal
Will now serenely flow;
Our minds will be transfigured
By a heightened inner glow.
In the wine of life all golden
The starworld now dissolves,
With rapture we will drink it
And be bright stars ourselves.

Now love is freely given,
No parting can there be.
The whole of life now surges
Like an endless sea.
Only one eternal poem —
One Night of joyful'grace —
And the sun of all of us
Is found within God’s face.
