The Lake

[Tenth Meditation.]

Thus endlessly driven toward new coasts,
Into night eternal borne away,
Will we never, on the sea of time,
Cast anchor for one day?

O lake! the year has scarcely run its course.
Near the waves she hoped to see once more,
Look! I come alone to sit where she sat
On this stone, by this shore.

You thundered like this under these deep rocks;
Like this you broke on this battered strand;
And thus the wind threw the waves’ foam
On her feet in the sand.

One evening — remember? — in silence we rowed;
We heard far away, between wave and sky,
Only the rhythmical sound of oars
And your waters’ harmony.

All at once, with strains unknown on earth,
Echoes from the spellbound shore broke free;
The lake was heedful, and heard these words
From the voice most dear to me:

“Time, suspend your flight! And you, kind hours,
Leave off your endless race!
Let us enjoy the fleeting pleasures
Of the best of our days!

“Enough unhappy ones implore you:
For them keep flowing yet.
Take with their days their racking cares;
The happy ones forget!

“In vain I ask a few more moments,
Time hastens and takes flight;
To this night I say: ‘Go slow’; yet dawn
Comes to disperse the night.

“Let us love, let us enjoy our love
Before the hour is gone!
Man has no haven, time no shore;
It flows, and we pass on!

Jealous time, must our joyful moments,
When love pours out long waves of bliss,
Fly far from us as fast as days
Filled with unhappiness?

What! Will we not keep at least their trace?
What! Gone forever? All of them lost?
Will time that gave and took them give them back
No more at any cost?

What do you do with the days you devour?
Eternity, the past, black abyss,
Speak: will you restore those ecstasies
That you have seized from us?

O lake! mute rocks! caverns! and dark woods!
You whom time spares or makes young again,
Gracious nature, of that night at least
Let the memory remain!

Let it live in your calms and in your storms,
Lovely lake, and in your smiling banks,
And in these black firs, and wild rocks,
Which loom upon your flanks!

Let it live in the echoing shores,
In the evanescent rustling breeze,
In the silver star with gentle light
That turns your waters white.

Let the faint odors embalmed in air,
Let the moaning wind, the sighing reed,
Let all that is heard, or seen, or breathed,
Let them say: “They loved indeed!”
