The Gods of Greece

While you still the lovely world commanded,
While on gentle leading-strings of joy
Guided still a happier human era,
Lovely beings from the land of myth!
While your blissful worship still was shining,
Different, oh how different was it then!
While your temple still was hung with garlands,
Venus Amathusia!

While the colorful veil of poetry
Still wound charmingly around the truth —
Then through all creation flowed life’s fullness,
And what nevermore will feel, then felt.
Closer to the breast of love to press her
Men raised nature to a nobler rank;
Everything revealed to eyes enlightened —
Everything — a trace divine.

Now where only, as our wise men tell us,
Soullessly a fireball revolves,
Then was riding in his golden carriage
Helios in quiet majesty.
Oreads then dwelled on all these mountains,
While a Dryad lived within that tree,
Out of urns the lovely Naiads carried
Leapt the rivers’ silver foam.

Once that laurel writhed in supplication,
Tantalus’ daughter is silent in this stone,
Out that reed sings Syrinx her lamenting,
Philomela’s grief comes from this grove.
Once that brook received Demeter’s teardrops
Which she wept for lost Persephone,
Once upon this hilltop called Cythera
To her love, alas, in vain.

Then to greet Deucalion’s descendants
Great divinities would still come down,
While to conquer Pyrrha’s lovely daughters
Hyperion assumed the shepherd’s staff.
Linking men and deities and heroes
Amor fastened them with lovely bonds,
Mortal men beside their gods and heroes
Sacrificed in Amathus.

Praying at the altars of the Graces
Bowed the lovely priestess on her knees,
Sent her silent wishes to Cythera,
Sent her vows unto the Charites.
Noble pride, the realm above to govern
This she taught to all her godlike rank,
And to guard the holy girdle’s magic
Zeus himself could not resist.

Heavenly and deathless was the fire
Flowing into Pindar’s lofty hymns,
Streaming down into Arion’s lyre,
Pouring into Phidias’ stone.
Better beings, figures more ennobled,
These declared the highest lineage.
Gods, who overflowed the bounds of heaven,
Saw it here built up again.

One god’s kindness then was felt more worthy,
More beloved each of nature’s gifts.
Under Iris’ lovely bow was blooming
Lovelier the meadow rich in pearls.
Then the dawns shone forth in greater glory
Rose-resplendent in Himeros’ robe,
More mellifluous the flute resounded
When the shepherd god would play.

Youth was painted then as more loveworthy:
Ganymede’s portrayal caught its bloom.
Virtue, then more godlike, more heroic,
Held Tritonia’s Medusa-shield.
Knots were gentler when Lord Hymen tied them,
Holier the heart’s eternal bond,
Life’s tender thread itself found passage
Gentler through the Parcae’s hands.

Joyful shouts of merry thyrsus-swingers
And majestic panthers in a team
Told the great joy-bringer was arriving.
Faun and satyr stagger in the lead,
Raving Maenads wildly leap around him
Dancing praises to his gift of wine,
And our entertainer’s cheeks invite us
Happily to drink the cup.

Higher rose the worth of what was given
When the giver cherished it as well,
Closer came the Creator to the pleasure
That in every creature’s bosom flowed.
Is mine revealed to the understanding?
Is he hidden by the screen of clouds?
Wearily I look in the land of ideas,
Vainly in the world of sense.

Palace-like your temples rang with laughter,
In your glory heroes held their games 90
On the crown-rich feastdays of the Isthmus,
And the chariots thundered to the goal.
Beautifully woven soul-filled dances
Round the splendid altar made a wreath,
Round your head the winner’s crown was braided,
Garlands graced your fragrant hair.

People sent the choicest of their treasures,
Shepherds gave the dearest of their lambs,
While the uproar of his guests’ enjoyment
Honored best the generous host.
Where am I going? This gloomy silence —
Does it tell me who my Maker is?
Dark, as he himself, his somber mantle:
Self-denial is what honors him.

No appalling skeleton was standing
At the bedside of the dying one:
By a kiss the final breath was taken,
Sad and still a Genius let sink
His torch. Brilliant and lovely pictures
Jested even at necessity, lio
And the sternest fate had milder features
Through the veil of sweet humanity.

Under frightful laws of holy spirits
No divine barbarian sat as judge,
He whose eyes no teardrops ever moisten, -
Tender being, whom a woman bore.
Even Orcus’ potent scales of justice
By a mortal’s offspring once were held,
And the Furies’ rage was quieted
By the Thracian’s soulful dirge.

Every shade regained what made it joyful
In Elysium’s enchanted groves,
Faithful love recovered faithful partner,
And the lost charioteer his path.
Orpheus’ lute resounds with songs familiar,
In Alcestis’ arms Admetus falls,
There Orestes knows his friend again,
Philoctetes finds his bow.

Lost it is, and never reappearing,
What by living in this world I lost:
Every happiness is now denied me,
Every bond I cherished as divine.
Strange incomprehensible enchantments
Make me shudder, coming from those worlds,
And the joys that always made me happy
Change to new ones I can do without.

Higher prizes strengthened then the wrestler
Laboring up virtue’s rocky path,
Glorious performers of great exploits
Mounted upwards to the Blessed Ones.
Silently the troop of gods paid homage
To the one who summoned back the dead,
From Olympus’ summit twinborn brothers
Light the pilot through the waves.

Lovely world, where are you? Come again now,
Primal nature’s sweetest blossom-time!
Ah, alone in fairylands of lyric
Does your golden footprint still survive.
Wasted away, all your fields are mourning,
Not one god reveals himself to me,
From that lovely picture, warm and living,
Just the shadow yet remains.

All those sweetest blossoms now are fallen,
Downed by dreadful windstorms from the north.
One among them all to make the richer
This whole world of gods has passed away.
Sadly searching through the starry heavens,
You, Selene, I can find no more.
Through the waves I call, and through the forests:
Ah, they echo emptily.

Senseless of the gifts of joy she offers,
Never by her excellence entranced,
Never mindful of the arm that guides her,
Never richer through my gratitude,
Feeling nothing of her artist’s honor,
Like the dead stroke of a pendulum,
Law of gravity’s most humble servant:
She is nature god-bereft.

To unbind herself again tomorrow
Her own sepulchre she digs today,
And the moons on ever changeless spindles
Wind themselves and unwind up and down.
Idle now, the gods returned to poems,
To their homeland, useless in a world
Which, its gentle leading-strings outgrowing,
Now upholds itself alone.

Friendless, with no brother, with no equal,
With no mother earthly or divine,
Someone else now rules in aether’s region
Holding Saturn’s empty fallen throne.
He was blessed ere people joyed around him,
He was blessed among deserted fields;
He sees in the long stream of the ages
Always only — his own face.

Once I could be native of Olympus;
Every god his marble glorifies
Once the lofty sculptor could resemble.
What’s the highest spirit, next to You,
If it 's one of those that come from mortals?
Only first and noblest of the worms.
Once the gods were more like human beings,
Human beings more divine.

You whose rays pour down below and strike me,
Understanding’s Maker and its Work!
Give me wings to struggle upward toward You,
Scales to weigh You in — or take from me,
Take away the earnest rigid goddess
Who holds up to me the blinding glass;
Send below to me her gentler sister,
Saving that one for the other world.
