The Yellow Rays

On summer Sundays, in the evening, around six,
When enthusiastic crowds abandon their homes
To go frolic in the field,
I watch from above, the comings and goings
Of these happy people; I sit at my window
Behind shutters concealed.

Workers in their Sunday best, with their hearts at ease;
A book is open beside me, on my chair:
I read the pages or pretend;
And the yellow rays that the sunset brings back.
Even more yellow that night than during the week,
On my white curtain descend.

I love to see them pierce windowpane and blind;
Each slanting shaft obliquely tracing in my mind
A stream of gold atoms;
And reaching into my very soul through my eye,
They also re-gild thousands of my thoughts,
Thousands more phantoms.

These are confusing days where the thread reappears.
Memories of childhood, as sweet to a soul
As a dream of far away:
It was at this same hour (Oh! I remember)
That, after vespers, we, the children, were called,
To the chapel choir bay.

The lamp burned yellow; yellow too were the candles;
And the glow on the veiled brows of the virgins
Yellowed their icy white;
And the priest attired in his snowy stole
Bent a yellowed brow, like a cornstalk leaning
Under the reaper’s scythe.

Oh! Who, while kneeling in a darkened church
Has not many times placed his prayer on the stone
Like a grain of salt so pure?
Who has not kissed the yellowed ivory of the cross?
Who has not read the story of the Man-God
In missal yellowed and mature?

But, where can we find it, once it has been lost,
This humble faith of the heart, which an angel hung
On our cradles as a sign;
Which a mother nourished in us with great zeal;
Which a priest watered as a seedling every day
With liquid from streams divine?

Can it bloom again after the storm has blown
And when pride, aroused in our hearts, has, in its rage,
Placed its foot on the altar?
We are then very weak, when disaster arrives
And death ... Isn’t it essential that the vision
Of eternity not falter?

I watched slowly die, alas, my good old aunt,
Last year; on her bed, silent and out of breath,
She survived three days,
Then she died. I was near her in the alcove;
I remained near her there when, on her balding head
The shroud was wrapped three ways.

The coffin arrived, cut from alderwood;
I was there ... and, around, candles burned yellow,
Several priests softly prayed;
But, in vain, I tried to recite final hymns;
My eye could not cry and my voice could not pray,
Doubt would not be allayed.

Yet, she loved me ... my mother also loves me
And my mother, in turn, will die; then I, myself,
In the yellow shroud
Must bury her; I will hammer under the slab
This body, withered but dear, a part of my soul;
Then I will be alone;

Alone, without mother, sister, brother, wife;
For, who would want to love me? Which caring hand
Would join itself to mine?
But already the sun recedes before the dark,
And the rays it casts on my window are softer
Fading along the line.

No, never will my name bring to my fiancee
A blushing look of love, dreaming in her thought
Of a young husband’s call;
Never will two sweet children, angels of promise
Together hold over me during Mass,
The yellowing pall.

No, never, when death stretches me out on my bed,
Will my forehead feel the kiss of a sweet mouth
Nor will my eye growing cold
See good-bye whispered by lips partly closed!
Never on my coffin will yellow a rose,
Nor wither a marigold.

Thus proceed my thoughts, and night has arrived;
I go down, and soon, amid the unknown crowd
I start to drown my self-pity:
Many arms elbow me; we enter the tavern,
We leave the cabaret; a drunken invalid
Warbles a tremulous ditty.

These are only songs, clamors, drunken scuffles,
Or merely flirtations, kisses without shame,
And public display.
I re-enter: along my way, they hurry, they rush;
All night long I hear the drunkards drag each other
Along my street’s melee.
