Childe Harold's Pilgrimage

[Canto III, st. 16 – 18, 21 – 28: ‘Revelry by Night’]

XVI.

Self-exiled Harold wanders forth again,
 With nought of hope left – but with less of gloom. 
The very knowledge that he lived in vain,
 That all was over on this side the tomb,
 Had made despair a smilingness assume,
 Which, though ’twere wild (as on the plundered wreck
 When mariners would madly meet their doom
 With draughts intemperate on the sinking deck),
 Did yet inspire a cheer, which he forbore to check. 

XVII.

Stop! for thy tread is on an Empire’s dust! 
An earthquake’s spoil is sepulchred below! 
Is the spot marked with no colossal bust? 
Nor column trophied for triumphal show? 
None. But the moral’s truth tells simpler so –
 As the ground was before, thus let it be! 
How that red rain hath made the harvest grow! 
And is this all the world has gained by thee,
 Thou first and last of fields – king-making victory? 

XVIII.

And Harold stands upon this place of skulls,
 The grave of France, the deadly Waterloo! 
How in an hour the power which gave annuls
 Its gifts, transferring fame as fleeting too! 
In ‘pride of place’ here last the Eagle flew,
 Then tore with bloody talon the rent plain,
 Pierced by the shaft of banded nations through;
 Ambition’s life and labours all were vain –
 He wears the shattered links of the World’s broken chain. 

XXI.

There was a sound of revelry by night,
 And Belgium’s capital had gathered then
 Her beauty and her chivalry – and bright
 The lamps shone o’er fair women and brave men. 
A thousand hearts beat happily, and when
 Music arose with its voluptuous swell,
 Soft eyes looked love to eyes which spake again,
 And all went merry as a marriage-bell –
 But hush, hark, a deep sound strikes like a rising knell! 

XXII.

Did ye not hear it? No – ’twas but the wind,
 Or the car rattling o’er the stony street –
 On with the dance! Let joy be unconfined! 
No sleep till morn, when youth and pleasure meet
 To chase the glowing hours with flying feet –
 But hark! that heavy sound breaks in once more
 As if the clouds its echo would repeat,
 And nearer, clearer, deadlier, than before. 
Arm! Arm! It is, it is, the cannon’s opening roar! 

XXIII.

Within a windowed niche of that high hall
 Sat Brunswick’s fated Chieftain; he did hear
 That sound the first amidst the festival,
 And caught its tone with death’s prophetic ear –
 And when they smiled because he deemed it near,
 His heart more truly knew that peal too well
 Which stretched his father on a bloody bier,
 And roused the vengeance blood alone could quell:
 He rushed into the field, and, foremost fighting, fell! 

XXIV.

Ah! then and there was hurrying to and fro,
 And gathering tears, and tremblings of distress,
 And cheeks all pale which but an hour ago
 Blushed at the praise of their own loveliness –
 And there were sudden partings, such as press
 The life from out young hearts, and choking sighs
 Which ne’er might be repeated. Who could guess
 If ever more should meet those mutual eyes,
 Since upon night so sweet such awful morn could rise! 

XXV.

And there was mounting in hot haste! The steed,
 The mustering squadron, and the clattering car,
 Went pouring forward, with impetuous speed
 And swiftly forming in the ranks of war –
 And the deep thunder, peal on peal, afar;
 And near, the beat of the alarming drum
 Roused up the soldier ere the morning star;
 While thronged the citizens, with terror dumb,
 Or whispering, with white lips: ‘The foe! They come! they come!’ 

XXVI.

And wild and high the Cameron’s Gathering rose –
 The war-note of Lochiel, which Albyn’s hills
 Have heard, and heard too have her Saxon foes. 
How in the noon of night that pibroch thrills,
 Savage and shrill! But with the breath which fills
 Their mountain-pipe, so fill the mountaineers
 With the fierce native daring which instils
 The stirring memory of a thousand years –
 And Evan’s, Donald’s, fame rings in each clansman’s ears! 

XXVII.

And Ardennes waves above them her green leaves,
 Dewy with Nature’s tear-drops, as they pass,
 Grieving, if aught inanimate e’er grieves,
 Over the unreturning brave – alas,
 Ere evening to be trodden like the grass
 Which now beneath them, but above shall grow
 In its next verdure, when this fiery mass
 Of living valour, rolling on the foe
 And burning with high hope, shall moulder cold and low. 

XXVIII.

Last noon beheld them full of lusty life,
 Last eve in Beauty’s circle proudly gay,
 The midnight brought the signal-sound of strife,
 The morn the marshalling in arms – the day,
 Battle’s magnificently-stern array! 
The thunder-clouds close o’er it, which, when rent,
 The earth is covered thick with other clay
 Which her own clay shall cover, heaped and pent,
 Rider and horse – friend, foe – in one red burial blent! 
