The Lay of the Last Minstrel

[Canto II., st. I. -XXIII.]

Canto II.

I.

If thou wouldst view fair Melrose aright,
 Go visit it by the pale moon-light;
 For the gay beams of lightsome day
 Gild, but to flout, the ruins grey. 
When the broken arches are black in night,
 And each shafted oriel glimmers white;
 When the cold light’s uncertain shower
 Streams on the ruined central tower;
 When buttress and buttress, alternately,
 Seem framed of ebon and ivory;
 When silver edges the imagery,
 And the scrolls that teach thee to live and die;
 When distant Tweed is heard to rave,
 And the owlet to hoot o’er the dead man’s grave;
 Then go – but go alone the while –
 Then view St David’s ruined pile;
 And, home returning, soothly swear,
 Was never scene so sad and fair! 

II.

Short halt did Deloraine make there;
 Little recked he of the scene so fair. 
With dagger’s hilt, on the wicket strong,
 He struck full loud, and struck full long. 
The porter hurried to the gate –
 ‘Who knocks so loud, and knocks so late?’ 
From Branksome I’, the warrior cried;
 And strait the wicket opened wide:
 For Branksome’s chiefs had in battle stood,
 To fence the rights of fair Melrose;
 And lands and livings, many a rood,
 Had gifted the shrine for their souls’ repose. 

III.

Bold Deloraine his errand said;
 The porter bent his humble head;
 With torch in hand, and foot unshod,
 And noiseless step, the path he trod;
 The arched cloisters, far and wide,
 Rang to the warrior’s clanking stride;
 Till, stooping low his lofty crest,
 He entered the cell of the ancient priest,
 And lifted his barred aventayle,
 To hail the Monk of St Mary’s aisle. 

IV.

‘The Ladye of Branksome greets thee by me –
 Says that the fated hour is come,
 And that to-night I shall watch with thee,
 To win the treasure of the tomb.’ 
From sackcloth couch the Monk arose,
 With toil his stiffened limbs he reared
 (A hundred years had flung their snows
 On his thin locks and floating beard),

V.

And strangely on the knight looked he,
 And his blue eyes gleamed wild and wide:
 ‘And, darest thou, warrior, seek to see
 What Heaven and Hell alike would hide? 
My breast, in belt of iron pent,
 With shirt of hair and scourge of thorn,
 For threescore years, in penance spent,
 My knees those flinty stones have worn –
 Yet all too little to atone
 For knowing what should ne’er be known. 
Wouldst thou thy every future year
 In ceaseless prayer and penance drie,
 Yet wait thy latter end with fear? –
 Then, daring warrior, follow me!’ 

VI.

‘Penance, father, will I none! 
Prayer know I hardly one –
 For mass or prayer can I rarely tarry,
 Save to patter an Avé Mary
 When I ride on a Border foray –
 Other prayer can I none
 So speed me my errand, and let me be gone.’ 

VII.

Again on the Knight looked the Churchman old
 And again he sighed heavily;
 For he had himself been a warrior bold,
 And fought in Spain and Italy. 
And he thought on the days that were long since bye,
 When his limbs were strong, and his courage was high;
 Now, slow and faint, he led the way,
 Where, cloistered round, the garden lay;
 The pillared arches were over their head,
 And beneath their feet were the bones of the dead. 

VIII.

Spreading herbs and flowerets bright,
 Glistened with the dew of night;
 Nor herb nor floweret glistened there,
 But was carved in the cloister arches as fair. 
The Monk gazed long on the lovely moon,
 Then into the night he looked forth;
 And red and bright the streamers light
 Were dancing in the glowing north. 
So had he seen, in fair Castile,
 The youth in glittering squadrons start;
 Sudden the flying jennet wheel,
 And hurl the unexpected dart. 
He knew, by the streamers that shot so bright,
 That spirits were riding the northern light. 

IX.

By a steel-clenched postern-door,
 They entered now the chancel tall;
 The darkened roof rose high aloof
 On pillars lofty, and light, and small;
 The keystone, that locked each ribbéd aisle,
 Was a fleur-de-lys, or a quatre-feuille;
 The corbells were carved grotesque and grim;
 And the pillars, with clustered shafts so trim,
 With plinth and with capital flourished around,
 Seemed bundles of lances which garlands had bound. 

X.

Full many a scutcheon and banner riven
 Shook to the cold night-wind of heaven,
 Around the screened altar’s pale;
 And there the dying lamps did burn,
 Before thy low and lonely urn,
 Oh gallant chief of Otterburne,
 And thine, dark knight of Liddesdale! 
Oh fading honours of the dead! 
Oh high ambition, lowly laid! 

XI.

The moon on the east oriel shone,
 Through slender shafts of shapely stone,
 By foliaged tracery combined;
 Thou wouldst have thought some fairy’s hand,
 ’Twixt poplars straight, the osier wand,
 In many a freakish knot, had twined –
 Then framed a spell, when the work was done,
 And changed the willow-wreaths to stone. 
The silver light, so pale and faint,
 Shewed many a prophet and many a saint,
 Whose image on the glass was dyed;
 Full in the midst, his cross of red
 Triumphant Michael brandishéd,
 And trampled the apostate’s pride. 
The moonbeam kissed the holy pane,
 And threw on the pavement a bloody stain. 

XII.

They sate them down on a marble stone
 (A Scottish monarch slept below);
 Thus spoke the Monk, in solemn tone:
 ‘I was not always a man of woe,
 For Paynim countries I have trod
 And fought beneath the cross of God –
 Now, strange to my eyes thine arms appear,
 And their iron clang sounds strange to my ear. 

XIII.

In these far climes, it was my lot
 To meet the wondrous Michael Scott;
 A wizard of such dreaded fame,
 That when, in Salamanca’s cave,
 Him listed his magic wand to wave,
 The bells would ring in Notre Dame! 
Some of his skill he taught to me;
 And, warrior, I could say to thee
 The words that clove Eildon hills in three,

And bridled the Tweed with a curb of stone;
 But to speak them were a deadly sin;
 And for having but thought them my heart within,
 A treble penance must be done. 

XIV.

When Michael lay on his dying-bed,
 His conscience was awakenéd;
 He bethought him of his sinful deed,
 And he gave me a sign to come with speed:
 I was in Spain when the morning rose,
 But I stood by his bed ere evening close! 
The words may not again be said
 That he spoke to me, on death-bed laid;
 They would rend this Abbaye’s massy nave,
 And pile it in heaps above his grave. 

XV.

I swore to bury his mighty book,
 That never mortal might therein look;
 And never to tell where it was hid,
 Save at his chief of Branksome’s need –
 And when that need was past and o’er,
 Again the volume to restore. 
I buried him on St Michael’s night,
 When the bell tolled one, and the moon was bright;
 And I dug his chamber among the dead,
 Where the floor of the chancel was stained red,
 That his patron’s cross might over him wave,
 And scare the fiends from the wizard’s grave. 

XVI.

It was a night of woe and dread,
 When Michael in the tomb I laid! 
Strange sounds along the chancel past;
 The banners waved without a blast!’ 
(Still spoke the Monk, when the bell tolled one –
 I tell you, that a braver man
 Than William of Deloraine, good at need,
 Against a foe ne’er spurred a steed;
 Yet somewhat was he chilled with dread,
 And his hair did bristle upon his head.) 

XVII.

‘Lo, warrior, now the cross of red
 Points to the grave of the mighty dead;
 Within it burns a wondrous light,
 To chase the spirits that love the night:
 That lamp shall burn unquenchably,
 Until the eternal doom shall be.’ 
Slow moved the Monk to the broad flagstone,
 Which the bloody cross was traced upon:
 He pointed to a secret nook;
 A bar from thence the warrior took;
 And the Monk made a sign with his withered hand,
 The grave’s huge portal to expand. 

XVIII.

With beating heart to the task he went
 His sinewy frame o’er the gravestone bent),
 With bar of iron heaved amain,
 Till the toil-drops fell from his brows like rain! 
It was by dint of passing strength
 That he moved the massy stone at length. 
I would you had been there to see
 How the light broke forth so gloriously –
 Streamed upward to the chancel roof,
 And through the galleries far aloof! 
No earthly flame blazed e’er so bright:
 It shone like Heaven’s own blessed light,
 And, issuing from the tomb,
 Shewed the Monk’s cowl and visage pale,
 Danced on the dark-browed Warrior’s mail,
 And kissed his waving plume. 

XIX.

Before their eyes the wizard lay
 As if he had not been dead a day,
 His hoary beard in silver rolled
 (He seemed some seventy winters old),
 A palmer’s amice wrapped him round,
 With a wrought Spanish baldric bound,
 Like a pilgrim from beyond the sea;
 His left hand held his book of might,
 A silver cross was in his right;
 The lamp was placed beside his knee. 
High and majestic was his look,
 At which the fellest fiends had shook,
 And all unruffled was his face –
 They trusted his soul had gotten grace! 

XX.

Often had William of Deloraine
 Rode through the battle’s bloody plain,
 And trampled down the warriors slain,
 And neither known remorse or awe;
 Yet now remorse and awe he owned:
 His breath came thick, his head swam round,
 When this strange scene of death he saw! 
Bewildered and unnerved he stood,
 And the priest prayed fervently and loud –
 With eyes averted prayed he,
 He might not endure the sight to see
 Of the man he had loved so brotherly. 

XXI.

And when the priest his death-prayer had prayed,
 Thus unto Deloraine he said:
 ‘Now speed thee what thou hast to do,
 Or, warrior, we may dearly rue;
 For those thou mayest not look upon
 Are gathering fast round the yawning stone!’ 
Then Deloraine, in terror, took
 From the cold hand the mighty book,
 With iron clasped and with iron bound –
 He thought as he took it the dead man frowned,
 But the glare of the sepulchral light
 Perchance had dazzled the warrior’s sight. 

XXII.

When the huge stone sunk o’er the tomb
 The night returned, in double gloom,
 For the moon had gone down and the stars were few,
 And, as the Knight and Priest withdrew,
 With wavering steps and dizzy brain,
 They hardly might the postern gain. 
’Tis said, as through the aisles they passed
 They heard strange noises on the blast;
 And through the cloister-galleries small,
 Which at mid-height thread the chancel-wall,
 Loud sobs, and laughter louder, ran –
 And voices unlike the voice of man,
 As if the fiends kept holiday
 Because these spells were brought today. 
I cannot tell how the truth may be,
 I say the tale as ’twas said to me! 

XXIII.

‘Now hie thee hence’, the father said,
 ‘And when we are on death-bed laid,
 O may our dear Ladye, and sweet St John,
 Forgive our souls for the deed we have done!’ 
The Monk returned him to his cell,
 And many a prayer and penance sped –
 When the Convent met at the noontide-bell,
 The Monk of St Mary’s aisle was dead. 
