De Levendes Land

O, wonderful land,
 Where hair turns not grey, falls so softly Time’s hand;
 Where sun does not burn, nor the seas’ white waves fling,
 Where autumn embraces the flowering Spring,
 Where sunset and dawn always glow with the bright
 Noon-radiant light. 

O, heavenly land,
 Where tears do not run like the hour-glasses sand,
 Where wish that is worthy is wished not in vain,
 Where lacks only that which here causes us pain. 
Of all that we seek for, we long for the most
 Thy halcyon coast. 

O, fair promised land,
 We hail in the dawn’s smiling crystalline strand! 
The child takes as real thy bright image there seen,
 And dreams thou art found where the forest grows green,
 Where children can share with the flowers of May
 Their innocent day. 

O, transient dream
 Of Eden’s green isle in Time’s fast-flowing stream,
 Of temples of Joy in the Valley of Tears,
 Of demigod life in Mortality’s spheres. 
To most so will vanish to-day as of yore
 The life-giving shore. 

Delusory dream! 
Thou luminous bubble in Time’s flowing stream! 
In vain does the bard with his song and his pen
 From brilliant shades thee create once again;
 When likeness comes nearest, then little ones weep
 The vision to keep. 

Enchanting bright dream:
 Eternity’s pearl in Time’s glittering stream! 
The heart’s dearest wish, so in picture and mould
 Men strive to enfold for all time what they know
 Is destined to go. 

O, Spirit of Love! 
I kiss like a child Thy bright hand which above
 From Heaven comes reaching to Earth’s heavy mould
 And touches our eyelids with fingers of gold,
 That heavenlike rises above rumbling strand
 The wonderful land. 

O, Name of all Grace,
 Who open to us Thy celestial embrace! 
Unblighted the Spirit can touch human clay,
 Reviving the leaf that had withered away. 
Bowed low to the ground on my knees let me be,
 But God can me see. 

O, Faith, Thou most rare! 
Whose swaying bridge over the deep can us bear,
 Defying the ice-river’s loud-roaring strand,
 From Death’s spectral home to the life-giving land. 
Come lower beside me and stay, high-born guest,
 As you like it best. 

O, Hope on light wing! 
Reborn by the fond, my Godbrother, Thou swing
 On many swift flights to the land beyond this,
 For alle the good tidings Thou brought and this bliss:
 When hope is no longer, then joy I shall see;
 My thanks be to Thee! 

O, Love, Thou calm spring,
 That feeds the strength flowing within ev’rything! 
He calls Thee His Father who will set us free,
 All life of the spirit is kindled by Thee;
 Thy Kingdom is found where we death overcome,
 The Kingdom to come! 

Our Father and Lord! 
In temples of flesh Thou will best be adored,
 As built by the Ghost in the Saviour’s Name,
 With smouldering altars within human frame. 
Such heaven-bright dwellings Thy spark here has won
 For Thee and Thy Son. 

O, Christian lot! 
That gives to the heart what the World has not got. 
We understand vaguely, we see now in part,
 It lives still within us, we feel in our heart. 
For my Land, says Life, is on Earth and above,
 My Kingdom of Love! 
