The Poet’s Vocation

Shores of Ganges heard the paean for the god
Of joy when Bacchus came, conquering all,
Young, from the Indus, with holy wine
Rousing the peoples from their slumber.

And you, angel of our time, shall you arouse them too,
The peoples unawakened? Give the laws,
Give life to us, conquer, you alone,
As Bacchus once, have right of conquest.

Not the thing that is man’s care and skill,
Inside a house or underneath the sky,
Though a man fends and feeds more nobly
Than animals do. Something else

Is put in the poet’s trust and care to serve.
To the highest lord, to him it is, we own,
That, being sung ever anew, him
Friendly hearts may sense more clearly.

Nevertheless, O all you heavenly gods
And all you streams and shores, hilltops and woods,
Where first, when by the hair one of you
Seized us and the unhoped-for spirit

Unforgettably came, astonishing, down
Upon us, godlike and creative, dumbfounding
The mind, every bone shook
As if struck by lightning — should we not,

You deeds rampaging out in the wide world,
You days of destiny, fast and furious, when the god goes,
Keeping his counsel, wherever the rage-drunk
Gigantic horses happen to take him —

Should we not speak of you? And when from the calm
And constant year harmony sounds in us, should
It ring as if in idle caprice
Some child had dared to touch for fun

The master’s consecrated and pure strings?
Was it for this you heard the prophets of the East
And Greek song and lately, poet,
Voices of thunder? Was it for this —

To press the spirit into service, burst in upon
The presence of the good, deriding it, heartless
Disavow simplicity itself and make it
Play for a fee like a beast captive?

Until the selfsame spirit, goaded to a rage,
Cries out, remembering its source, and the master
Hurling his hot darts comes
And leaves you flat, a soul extinguished.

Too long all things divine have been put to use,
Heavenly powers trifled away, mercies
Squandered for sport, thankless, a
Generation of schemers, and it presumes,

When the most sublime lord tills their fields,
To know daylight and the thunderer, all these
The telescope scans and quantifies
And names with names the heaven’s stars.

And yet with holy night the father will veil
Our eyes, that still we may not perish. Untamed
Excess he loves not. Power
Expands but cannot suborn heaven.

Nor is it good to be too knowing. Gratitude
Knows him. Yet to keep and contain it alone
Is a hard burden, others the poet
Gladly joins who help understanding.

Fearless yet, if he must, man stands, and lonely
Before God, simplicity protects him, no
Weapon he needs, nor subterfuge
Till God’s being not there helps him.
