Feast of the Poets

[Ll. 204-249]

All on a sudden, there rose on the stairs
 A noise as of persons with singular airs,
 You’d have thought ’twas the Bishops or Judges a-coming,
 Or whole court of Aldermen hawing and humming,
 Or Abbot at least, with his ushers before,
 But ’twas only Bob Southey and two or three more. 
As soon as he saw him Apollo seemed pleased,
 But as he had settled it not to be teased
 By all the vain dreamers from bedroom and brook,
 He turned from the rest without even a look! 
For Coleridge had vexed him long since I suppose
 By his idling, and gabbling, and muddling in prose,
 And Wordsworth one day made his very hairs bristle
 By going and changing his harp for a whistle! 
These heroes however, long used to attack,
 Were not by contempt to be so driven back
 But followed the God up, and shifting their place
 Stood full in his presence and looked in his face –
 When one began spouting the cream of orations
 In praise of bombarding his friends and relations,
 And tother some lines he had made on a straw,
 Showing how he had found it and what it was for,
 And how, when ’twas balanced, it stood like a spell! 
And how, when ’twas balanced no longer, it fell! 
A wild thing of scorn he described it to be,
 But he said it was patient to Heaven’s decree –
 Then he gazed upon nothing, and looking forlorn,
 Dropped a natural tear for that wild thing of scorn! 
Apollo half laughed betwixt anger and mirth,
 ‘And cried was there ever such trifling on Earth? 
It is not enough that this nonsense, I fear,
 Has hurt the fine head of my friend Robert here,
 But the very best promise bred up in this school
 Must show himself proudest in playing the fool. 
What – think ye a bard’s a mere gossip, who tells
 Of the everyday feelings of everyone else,
 And that poetry lies, not in something select,
 But in gathering the refuse that others reject. 
Must a ballad doled out by a spectacled nurse
 About Two-Shoes or Thumb be your model in verse,
 And your writings, instead of sound fancy and style,
 Look more like the morbid abstractions of bile? 
There is one of you here – ’twas of him that I spoke
 Who, instead of becoming a byeword and joke,
 Should have brought back our fine old pre-eminent way,
 And been the first man at my table today. 
