The Fall of Hyperion: A Dream

[Canto I, ll. 1-27, 87-294]

Fanatics have their dreams, wherewith they weave
 A paradise for a sect; the savage too
 From forth the loftiest fashion of his sleep
 Guesses at Heaven – pity these have not
 Traced upon vellum or wild Indian leaf
 The shadows of melodious utterance! 
But bare of laurel they live, dream, and die –
 For poesy alone can tell her dreams –
 With the fine spell of words alone can save
 Imagination from the sable chain
 And dumb enchantment. Who alive can say
 ‘Thou art no poet – mayst not tell thy dreams!’ 
Since every man whose soul is not a clod
 Hath visions, and would speak, if he had loved,
 And been well nurtured in, his mother tongue. 
Whether the dream now purposed to rehearse
 Be poet’s or fanatic’s will be known
 When this warm scribe my hand is in the grave. 
Methought I stood where trees of every clime,
 Palm, myrtle, oak, and sycamore, and beech,
 With plantain and spice-blossoms, made a screen –
 In neighbourhood of fountains (by the noise
 Soft-showering in my ears), and (by the touch
 Of scent) not far from roses. Turning round
 I saw an arbour with a drooping roof
 Of trellis-vines, and bells, and larger blooms,
 Like floral censers, swinging light in air ;
 Then to the west I looked, and saw far off
 An image, huge of feature as a cloud,
 At level of whose feet an altar slept,
 To be approached on either side by steps
 And marble balustrade, and patient travail
 To count with toil the innumerable degrees. 
Towards the altar sober-paced I went,
 Repressing haste as too unholy there,
 And, coming nearer, saw beside the shrine
 One ministering – and there arose a flame. 
When in mid-May the sickening east wind
 Shifts sudden to the south, the small warm rain
 Melts out the frozen incense from all flowers,
 And fills the air with so much pleasant health
 That even the dying man forgets his shroud –
 Even so that lofty sacrificial fire,
 Sending forth Maian incense, spread around
 Forgetfulness of everything but bliss,
 And clouded all the altar with soft smoke
 From whose white fragrant curtains thus I heard
 Language pronounced: ‘If thou canst not ascend
 These steps, die on that marble where thou art! 
Thy flesh, near cousin to the common dust,
 Will parch for lack of nutriment – thy bones
 Will wither in few years, and vanish so
 That not the quickest eye could find a grain
 Of what thou now art on that pavement cold. 
The sands of thy short life are spent this hour,
 And no hand in the universe can turn
 Thy hourglass if these gummed leaves be burnt
 Ere thou canst mount up these immortal steps.’ 
I heard, I looked: two senses – both at once
 So fine, so subtle – felt the tyranny
 Of that fierce threat and the hard task proposed. 
Prodigious seemed the toil! The leaves were yet
 Burning, when suddenly a palsied chill
 Struck from the pav
                  ed
                 level up my limbs,
 And was ascending quick to put cold grasp
 Upon those streams that pulse beside the throat –
 I shrieked, and the sharp anguish of my shriek
 Stung my own ears – I strove hard to escape
 The numbness, strove to gain the lowest step! 
Slow, heavy, deadly was my pace. The cold
 Grew stifling, suffocating at the heart,
 And when I clasped my hands I felt them not. 
One minute before death, my iced foot touched
 The lowest stair, and, as it touched, life seemed
 To pour in at the toes – I mounted up,
 As once fair angels on a ladder flew
 From the green turf to Heaven. 
‘Holy Power’,
 Cried I, approaching near the horn
                  ed
                 shrine,
 ‘What am I that should so be saved from death? 
What am I that another death come not
 To choke my utterance sacrilegious here?’ 
Then said the veil
                  ed
                 shadow: ‘Thou hast felt
 What ’tis to die and live again before
 Thy fated hour. That thou hadst power to do so
 Is thy own safety – thou hast dated on
 Thy doom.’ ‘High Prophetess’, said I, ‘purge off
 Benign, if so it please thee, my mind’s film.’ 
‘None can usurp this height’, returned that shade,
 ‘But those to whom the miseries of the world
 Are misery, and will not let them rest. 
All else who find a haven in the world
 Where they may thoughtless sleep away their days,
 If by a chance into this fane they come,
 Rot on the pavement where thou rottedst half!’ 
‘Are there not thousands in the world’, said I,
 Encouraged by the sooth voice of the shade,
 ‘Who love their fellows even to the death,
 Who feel the giant agony of the world,
 And more, like slaves to poor humanity
 Labour for mortal good? I sure should see
 Other men here – but I am here alone.’ 
‘Those whom thou spakest of are no visionaries’,
 Rejoined that voice, ‘they are no dreamers weak,
 They seek no wonder but the human face,
 No music but a happy-noted voice! 
They come not here, they have no thought to come –
 And thou art here, for thou art less than they. 
What benefit canst thou do, or all thy tribe,
 To the great world? Thou art a dreaming thing,
 A fever of thyself! Think of the earth –
 What bliss even in hope is there for thee? 
What haven? Every creature hath its home,
 Every sole man hath days of joy and pain,
 Whether his labours be sublime or low:
 The pain alone, the joy alone – distinct. 
Only the dreamer venoms all his days,
 Bearing more woe than all his sins deserve. 
Therefore – that happiness be somewhat shared –
 Such things as thou art are admitted oft
 Into like gardens thou didst pass erewhile,
 And suffered in these temples! For that cause
 Thou standest safe beneath this statue’s knees.’ 
‘That I am favoured for unworthiness
 By such propitious parley, medicined
 In sickness not ignoble, I rejoice –
 Aye, and could weep for love of such award.’ 
So answered I, continuing, ‘If it please,
 Majestic shadow, tell me: sure not all
 Those melodies sung into the world’s ear
 Are useless – sure a poet is a sage,
 A humanist, physician to all men? 
That I am none I feel – as vultures feel
 They are no birds when eagles are abroad. 
What am I then? Thou spakest of my tribe –
 What tribe?’ 
The tall shade veiled in drooping white
 Then spake, so much more earnest that the breath
 Moved the thin linen folds that drooping hung
 About a golden censer from the hand
 Pendent: ‘Art thou not of the dreamer tribe? 
The poet and the dreamer are distinct,
 Diverse, sheer opposite, antipodes! 
The one pours out a balm upon the world,
 The other vexes it.’ Then shouted I,
 Spite of myself, and with a Pythia’s spleen:
 ‘Apollo! Faded, far-flown Apollo! 
Where is thy misty pestilence to creep
 Into the dwellings, through the door crannies
 Of all mock lyrists, large self-worshippers
 And careless hectorers in proud bad verse. 
Though I breathe death with them it will be life
 To see them sprawl before me into graves! 
Majestic shadow, tell me where I am –
 Whose altar this? for whom this incense curls? 
What image this whose face I cannot see
 For the broad marble knees? and who thou art,
 Of accent feminine so courteous?’ 
Then the tall shade, in drooping linens veiled,
 Spoke out, so much more earnest, that her breath
 Stirred the thin folds of gauze that drooping hung
 About a golden censer from her hand
 Pendent; and by her voice I knew she shed
 Long-treasured tears. ‘This temple, sad and lone,
 Is all spared from the thunder of a war
 Foughten long since by giant hierarchy
 Against rebellion; this old image here,
 Whose carv
                  ed
                 features wrinkled as he fell,
 Is Saturn’s – I, Moneta, left supreme
 Sole priestess of his desolation.’ 
I had no words to answer, for my tongue,
 Useless, could find about its roof
                  ed
                 home
 No syllable of a fit majesty
 To make rejoinder to Moneta’s mourn. 
There was a silence, while the altar’s blaze
 Was fainting for sweet food: I looked thereon,
 And on the pav
                  ed
                 floor, where nigh were piled
 Faggots of cinnamon, and many heaps
 Of other crisp
                  ed
                 spice-wood – then again
 I looked upon the altar, and its horns
 Whitened with ashes, and its languorous flame –
 And then upon the offerings again. 
And so by turns, till sad Moneta cried,
 ‘The sacrifice is done! But not the less
 Will I be kind to thee for thy good will. 
My power, which to me is still a curse,
 Shall be to thee a wonder; for the scenes
 Still swooning vivid through my glob
                  ed
                 brain,
 With an electral changing misery,
 Thou shalt with these dull mortal eyes behold,
 Free from all pain – if wonder pain thee not!’ 
As near as an immortal’s spheréd words
 Could to a mother’s soften, were these last:
 And yet I had a terror of her robes,
 And chiefly of the veils, that from her brow
 Hung pale, and curtained her in mysteries
 That made my heart too small to hold its blood. 
This saw that Goddess, and with sacred hand
 Parted the veils. Then saw I a wan face,
 Not pined by human sorrows, but bright-blanched
 By an immortal sickness which kills not
 (It works a constant change, which happy death
 Can put no end to). Deathwards progressing
 To no death was that visage! It had past
 The lily and the snow; and beyond these
 I must not think now, though I saw that face –
 But for her eyes I should have fled away! 
They held me back, with a benignant light
 Soft mitigated by divinest lids
 Half-closed, and visionless entire they seemed
 Of all external things. They saw me not,
 But in blank splendour beamed like the mild moon
 Who comforts those she sees not – who knows not
 What eyes are upward cast. As I had found
 A grain of gold upon a mountain’s side,
 And, twinged with avarice, strained out my eyes
 To search its sullen entrails rich with ore,
 So at the view of sad Moneta’s brow
 I asked to see what things the hollow brain
 Behind enwombed – what high tragedy
 In the dark secret chambers of her skull
 Was acting, that could give so dread a stress
 To her cold lips, and fill with such a light
 Her planetary eyes, and touch her voice
 With such a sorrow. 
‘Shade of Memory’,
 Cried I, with act adorant at her feet,
 ‘By all the gloom hung round thy fallen house,
 By this last temple, by the golden age,
 By great Apollo, thy dear foster-child,
 And by thyself, forlorn divinity,
 The pale omega of a withered race,
 Let me behold, according as thou saidst,
 What in thy brain so ferments to and fro!’ 
No sooner had this conjuration passed
 My devout lips, than side by side we stood
 (Like a stunt bramble by a solemn pine)
 Deep in the shady sadness of a vale …
