Stanzas Written Under Aeolus’ Harp

Come ye, whose hearts the tyrant sorrows wound,
 Come ye, whose breasts the tyrant passions tear,
 And seek this harp in whose still varying sound
 Each woe its own appropriate plaint may hear. 

Solemn and slow yon murmuring cadence rolls
 Till on the attentive ear it dies away,
 To your fond griefs responsive – ye whose souls,
 O’er loved lost friends, regret’s sad tribute pay! 

But hark, in regular progression move
 Yon silver sounds, and mingle as they fall! 
Do they not wake thy trembling nerves, oh Love,
 And into warmer life thy feelings call? 

Again it speaks, but, shrill and swift, the tones
 In wild disorder strike upon the ear! 
Pale Frenzy listens, kindred wildness owns,
 And starts – appalled the well-known sounds to hear! 

Lo, e’en the gay, the giddy and the vain,
 In deep delight these vocal wires attend –
 Silent and breathless watch the varying strain
 And, pleased, the vacant toils of mirth suspend. 

So when the lute on Memnon’s statue hung
 (At day’s first rising) strains melodious poured
 Untouched by mortal hands, the gathering throng
 In silent wonder listened and adored. 

But the wild cadence of these trembling strings
 The enchantress Fancy with most rapture hears –
 At the sweet sound to grasp her wand she springs,
 And lo, her band of airy shapes appears! 

She (rapt enthusiast) thinks the melting strains
 A choir of angels breathe, in bright array
 Bearing on radiant clouds to yon blue plains
 A soul just parted from its silent clay. 

And oft at eve her wild creative eye
 Sees to the gale their silken pinions stream,
 While in the quivering trees soft zephyrs sigh,
 And through the leaves disclose the moon’s pale beam. 

Oh, breathing instrument, be ever near
 While to the pensive muse my vows I pay;
 Thy softest call the inmost soul can hear,
 Thy faintest breath can Fancy’s pinions play. 

And when art’s laboured strains my feelings tire,
 To seek thy simple music shall be mine;
 I’ll strive to win its graces to my lyre,
 And make my plaintive lays enchant like thine! 
