For Jarifa, at the Revels

Come, give me your hand, Jarifa,
on my brow let it repose;
there a séa ofdava flows,
boils and sears my mind away. -
Come, and bring close to my lips
your tormenting lips, still stained
with the kisses lovers rained
on your mouth just yesterday.

Where are purity and virtue,
where are truth and tenderness?
Child’s fables that used to bless
me then, in my youthful peace.
Give me wine, and let it drown
memory, and let life fly,
dazed, unfeeling, rushing by;
let the coffin bring surcease.

My face is aflame with sweat;
my eyes, uncertain, blood-red,
glitter, burning in my head,
andjjny heart is leaping, lost.
Run, woman, for I detest you;
to my touch, the hand I hold —
your hand here in mine — is cold,
and your kisses made of frost.

All alike! Insistent women,
devise new enticements, new
worlds, new caresses too:
a curse on the goods you proffer!
Your kisses are all deception,
your tenderness filled with lies
like the grace that charms our eyes;
grief is all the joy you offer.

I long for love and for glory,
I long for delight divine
that lives in these dreams of mine
but not in the world we know;
the light of that distant star
on which my fancies relied —
a will o’ the wisp, false guide,
toward which, lost and blind, I go.

Why is my soul, so dead to pleasure, still
alive to pain, which does not cease to come?
Why, since I lie inert, lacking all will,
have I not garnered peace, but tedium?

Why this unceasing burning of desire?
Why this vague yearning thought cannot explain,
which I, while I condemn it for a liar,
nevertheless pursue — although it lies — in vain?

Why so delude myself with loves and pleasures
that I well know beforehand are not real?
Trailing fantasy-women, fictive treasure,
why does my heart, in all its folly, feel —
knowing no flowered fields for sweet wayfaring,
but desert, shall it find, a stony plain,
and from each mindless and lascivious pairing
glean only boredom to endure in pain?

I threw myself headlong, with comet speed,
borne on the wings of fantasy unbound,
wherever restless thought, spurred on by need,
believed that joys and triumphs might be found.

I hurled myself, with daring, up on high
beyond this world into the heavenly sphere,
and there found doubt, and saw the radiant sky,
as if one more illusion, disappear.

Once more upon the earth, eager I sought
virtue and honor, mad with zeal — but found
foul-smelling dust and shifting sand. And naught
but that did my exhausted soul surround.

Women I saw, virginal, pure at first,
among white clouds tinted with heaven’s shining;
I touched them, and their virtue was dispersed
like smoke, to foul corruption swift declining.

I felt all my illusions melt away,
yet my desire, insatiable, would live.
I grasped the truth, and loathed my life that day:
I trust only the peace the tomb can give.

And still I search, and search with famished greed,
and still the soul desires each joyful lie;
I question, and the only voice I heed
replies, in fearful tones: “Despair and die;

die, wretched soul; your life is only sorrow,
joy a chimaera, and on earth no more
is peace reserved for you, nor cheer tomorrow,
but endless yearning and eternal war;

so does God punish every spirit bidden
by its own madness to attempt discerning
the truth, the secret kept forever hidden
from every mortal, far beyond our learning.”

Be still! No, I seek no longer
to see any more, to know;
defeated, my soul, brought low,
has a single hope: to rest.
Let all feeling in me perish,
since nothing is left of gladness;
let neither pleasure nor sadness
return to perturb my breast.

Pass on, pass on, you optical illusions,
deceive more — younger — souls, and then be gone,
luminous, pearly images, you visions
of golden crowns and laurel wreaths, pass on.

Pass on, pass on, voluptuous beauties, go,
dancing with loud abandon and wild glee;
pass on like airy phantoms, drift and flow
without the power to move or injure me.

And may they stun me senseless — the mad scene,
the glass on high, the music of the feast —
an night be done, and day find me serene
in the dull endless sleep of the deceased.

Come, Jarifa, you have suffered
as have I; you never weep;
but, sad girl! I know you keep
watch over my sorrows too.
They are one my grief and yours,
the tears you check in vain, inside ...
Like me, you wear it deep, to hide
a heart that’s ravaged through and through.
