This Lime-Tree Bower, My Prison

A Poem Addressed to Charles Lamb of the India-House, London

Well, they are gone, and here must I remain,
 This lime-tree bower my prison! I have lost
 Such beauties and such feelings as had been
 Most sweet to have remembered, even when age
 Had dimmed my eyes to blindness! They, meanwhile,
 My friends, whom I may never meet again,
 On springy heath along the hilltop edge
 Wander in gladness, and wind down, perchance,
 To that still roaring dell of which I told
 The roaring dell, o’erwooded, narrow, deep,
 And only speckled by the mid-day sun),
 Where its slim trunk the ash from rock to rock
 Flings arching like a bridge – that branchless ash,
 Unsunned and damp, whose few poor yellow leaves
 Ne’er tremble in the gale, yet tremble still,
 Fanned by the waterfall! And there my friends
 Behold the dark-green file of long lank weeds,
 That all at once – a most fantastic sight! –
 Still nod and drip beneath the dripping edge
 Of the dim clay-stone. 
Now my friends emerge
 Beneath the wide wide heaven, and view again
 The many-steepled tract magnificent
 Of hilly fields and meadows, and the sea,
 With some fair bark, perhaps, which lightly touches
 The slip of smooth clear blue betwixt two isles
 Of purple shadow! Yes, they wander on
 In gladness all; but thou, methinks, most glad,
 My gentle-hearted Charles! For thou hast pined
 And hungered after Nature many a year
 In the great city pent, winning thy way
 With sad yet patient soul, through evil and pain
 And strange calamity! Ah, slowly sink
 Behind the western ridge, thou glorious sun! 
Shine in the slant beams of the sinking orb,
 Ye purple heath-flowers! Richlier burn, ye clouds! 
Live in the yellow light, ye distant groves! 
And kindle, thou blue ocean! So my friend
 Struck with deep joy may stand, as I have stood,
 Silent with swimming sense; yea, gazing round
 On the wide landscape, gaze till all doth seem
 Less gross than bodily; a living thing
 Which acts upon the mind – and with such hues
 As clothe the Almighty Spirit when he makes
 Spirits perceive his presence. 
A delight
 Comes sudden on my heart, and I am glad
 As I myself were there! Nor in this bower,
 This little lime-tree bower, have I not marked
 Much that has soothed me. Pale beneath the blaze
 Hung the transparent foliage, and I watched
 Some broad and sunny leaf, and loved to see
 The shadow of the leaf and stem above
 Dappling its sunshine! And that walnut-tree
 Was richly tinged, and a deep radiance lay
 Full on the ancient ivy, which usurps
 Those fronting elms – and now, with blackest mass,
 Makes their dark branches gleam a lighter hue
 Through the late twilight. And though now the bat
 Wheels silent by, and not a swallow twitters,
 Yet still the solitary humble-bee
 Sings in the bean-flower! 
Henceforth I shall know
 That Nature ne’er deserts the wise and pure –
 No scene so narrow but may well employ
 Each faculty of sense, and keep the heart
 Awake to love and beauty! And sometimes
 ’Tis well to be bereft of promised good,
 That we may lift the soul, and contemplate
 With lively joy the joys we cannot share. 
My gentle-hearted Charles, when the last rook
 Beat its straight path along the dusky air
 Homewards, I blest it! – deeming its black wing
 (Now a dim speck, now vanishing in light)
 Had crossed the mighty orb’s dilated glory
 While thou stoodst gazing; or, when all was still,
 Flew creeking o’er thy head, and had a charm
 For thee, my gentle-hearted Charles, to whom
 No sound is dissonant which tells of life. 
