The Epigones

[extracts]

When I see the golden era of Romanian writ, it seems
 That I plunge into an ocean of delicious cloudless dreams;
 That on all sides I am girdled by sweet-scented vernal flowers;
 I see nights that stretch above me endless starry citadels,
 Days with three suns in their foreheads, verdant groves with philomels,
 Wells of subtle meditation and of songs no end of showers. 

And we, epigones, their offspring? Chilly feelings, broken harps,
 Too big-headed, too small-minded, impotent and worn out hearts,
 Each a grinning mask adjusted aptly on a scurvy mind,
 All Our Holy is a phantom and our homeland merely bluster,
 With us everything is varnish, everything but surface lustre. 
You believed in your own writings, we to all belief are blind. 

We? Cold dreamless eyes, inspectors of concrete things and connexions,
 Misinterpreting all pictures, simulating all affections,
 At this world we look with coldness and we call you visionaries,
 Everything is mere convention; what’s good now, tomorrow’s bad. 
You have striven for chimeras, fought for aims considered mad
 And awakened golden fancies in a world of woes and worries. 
Death and life succeed each other as the night succeeds the day –,
 Things can have no other meaning, purpose, destiny or way,
 Human beings make an icon and a symbol out of all,
 They call sacred, good and gracious what is simply worthless lumber,
 Range and classify their thinking into systems without number,
 And upon the bare dead body put a many-coloured pall. 
What is sacred meditation? A majestic honey-comb
 Rife with non-existing matter; an entangled wretched tome,
 Made still darker by researchers who will guide those gone astray. 
What is verse? A pallid angel with looks chaste, never dissembling,
 A voluptuous play with icons and with voices weak and trembling,
 A large robe of gold and purple on the heavy-weighing clay. 
Farewell, visionary natures, saints that yearned after the sky,
 Setting ocean-waves to music, making luminaries fly,
 And creating a new planet from this world of mud and grime;
 We reduce all to the ashes now within ourselves, tomorrow
 In the rubble; dolts or adepts, old, young, sound, soul, light, or sorrow,
 All is dust ... The world is brainless and it is the world we mime. 
