The Ruined Cottage

First Part

’Twas summer and the sun was mounted high;
 Along the south the uplands feebly glared
 Through a pale steam, and all the northern downs,
 In clearer air ascending, showed far off
 Their surfaces with shadows dappled o’er
 Of deep embattled clouds. Far as the sight
 Could reach those many shadows lay in spots
 Determined and unmoved, with steady beams
 Of clear and pleasant sunshine interposed –
 Pleasant to him who on the soft cool moss
 Extends his careless limbs beside the root
 Of some huge oak whose ag
                  ed
                 branches make
 A twilight of their own, a dewy shade
 Where the wren warbles while the dreaming man,
 Half-conscious of that soothing melody,
 With sidelong eye looks out upon the scene,
 By those impending branches made more soft,
 More soft and distant. 
Other lot was mine. 
Across a bare wide common I had toiled
 With languid feet which by the slippery ground
 Were baffled still; and when I stretched myself
 On the brown earth my limbs from very heat
 Could find no rest, nor my weak arm disperse
 The insect host which gathered round my face
 And joined their murmurs to the tedious noise
 Of seeds of bursting gorse that crackled round. 
I rose and turned towards a group of trees
 Which midway in that level stood alone;
 And thither come at length, beneath a shade
 Of clustering elms that sprang from the same root
 I found a ruined house, four naked walls
 That stared upon each other. I looked round,
 And near the door I saw an ag
                  ed
                 man
 Alone and stretched upon the cottage bench;
 An iron-pointed staff lay at his side. 
With instantaneous joy I recognized
 That pride of Nature and of lowly life,
 The venerable Armytage, a friend
 As dear to me as is the setting sun. 
Two days before
 We had been fellow-travellers. I knew
 That he was in this neighbourhood, and now
 Delighted found him here in the cool shade. 
He lay, his pack of rustic merchandise
 Pillowing his head. I guess he had no thought
 Of his way-wandering life. His eyes were shut,
 The shadows of the breezy elms above
 Dappled his face. With thirsty heat oppressed
 At length I hailed him, glad to see his hat
 Bedewed with water-drops, as if the brim
 Had newly scooped a running stream. He rose
 And pointing to a sun-flower, bade me climb
 The broken wall where that same gaudy flower
 Looked out upon the road. 
It was a plot
 Of garden-ground now wild, its matted weeds
 Marked with the steps of those whom as they passed,
 The gooseberry-trees that shot in long lank slips,
 Or currants hanging from their leafless stems
 In scanty strings, had tempted to o’erleap
 The broken wall. Within that cheerless spot,
 Where two tall hedgerows of thick alder boughs
 Joined in a damp cold nook, I found a well
 Half covered up with willow-flowers and grass. 
I slaked my thirst and to the shady bench
 Returned, and while I stood unbonneted
 To catch the motion of the cooler air
 The old man said, ‘I see around me here
 Things which you cannot see. We die, my friend,
 Nor we alone, but that which each man loved
 And prized in his peculiar nook of earth
 Dies with him, or is changed, and very soon
 Even of the good is no memorial left. 
The poets, in their elegies and songs
 Lamenting the departed, call the groves,
 They call upon the hills and streams to mourn,
 And senseless rocks – nor idly, for they speak
 In these their invocations with a voice
 Obedient to the strong creative power
 Of human passion. Sympathies there are
 More tranquil, yet perhaps of kindred birth,
 That steal upon the meditative mind
 And grow with thought. Beside yon spring I stood,
 And eyed its waters till we seemed to feel
 One sadness, they and I. For them a bond
 Of brotherhood is broken: time has been
 When every day the touch of human hand
 Disturbed their stillness, and they ministered
 To human comfort. When I stooped to drink
 A spider’s web hung to the water’s edge,
 And on the wet and slimy foot-stone lay
 The useless fragment of a wooden bowl. 
It moved my very heart. 
The day has been
 When I could never pass this road but she
 Who lived within these walls, when I appeared,
 A daughter’s welcome gave me, and I loved her
 As my own child. Oh sir, the good die first,
 And they whose hearts are dry as summer dust
 Burn to the socket. Many a passenger
 Has blest poor Margaret for her gentle looks
 When she upheld the cool refreshment drawn
 From that forsaken spring, and no one came
 But he was welcome, no one went away
 But that it seemed she loved him. She is dead,
 The worm is on her cheek, and this poor hut,
 Stripped of its outward garb of household-flowers,
 Of rose and sweetbriar, offers to the wind
 A cold bare wall whose earthy top is tricked
 With weeds and the rank speargrass. She is dead,
 And nettles rot and adders sun themselves
 Where we have sat together while she nursed
 Her infant at her breast. The unshod colt,
 The wandering heifer and the potter’s ass,
 Find shelter now within the chimney-wall
 Where I have seen her evening hearthstone blaze
 And through the window spread upon the road
 Its cheerful light. You will forgive me, sir,
 But often on this cottage do I muse
 As on a picture, till my wiser mind
 Sinks, yielding to the foolishness of grief. 

She had a husband, an industrious man,
 Sober and steady. I have heard her say
 That he was up and busy at his loom
 In summer ere the mower’s scythe had swept
 The dewy grass, and in the early spring
 Ere the last star had vanished. They who passed
 At evening, from behind the garden-fence
 Might hear his busy spade, which he would ply
 After his daily work till the daylight
 Was gone, and every leaf and flower were lost
 In the dark hedges. So they passed their days
 In peace and comfort, and two pretty babes
 Were their best hope next to the God in Heaven. 

You may remember, now some ten years gone,
 Two blighting seasons when the fields were left
 With half a harvest. It pleased Heaven to add
 A worse affliction in the plague of war;
 A happy land was stricken to the heart –
 ’Twas a sad time of sorrow and distress. 
A wanderer among the cottages,
 I with my pack of winter raiment saw
 The hardships of that season. Many rich
 Sunk down as in a dream among the poor,
 And of the poor did many cease to be,
 And their place knew them not. Meanwhile, abridged
 Of daily comforts, gladly reconciled
 To numerous self-denials, Margaret
 Went struggling on through those calamitous years
 With cheerful hope. But ere the second autumn,
 A fever seized her husband. In disease
 He lingered long, and when his strength returned
 He found the little he had stored to meet
 The hour of accident, or crippling age,
 Was all consumed. As I have said, ’twas now
 A time of trouble: shoals of artisans
 Were from their daily labour turned away
 To hang for bread on parish charity,
 They and their wives and children – happier far
 Could they have lived as do the little birds
 That peck along the hedges, or the kite
 That makes her dwelling in the mountain rocks. 

Ill fared it now with Robert, he who dwelt
 In this poor cottage. At his door he stood
 And whistled many a snatch of merry tunes
 That had no mirth in them, or with his knife
 Carved uncouth figures on the heads of sticks;
 Then idly sought about through every nook
 Of house or garden any casual task
 Of use or ornament, and with a strange
 Amusing but uneasy novelty
 He blended where he might the various tasks
 Of summer, autumn, winter, and of spring. 
But this endured not, his good humour soon
 Became a weight in which no pleasure was,
 And poverty brought on a petted mood
 And a sore temper. Day by day he drooped,
 And he would leave his home, and to the town
 Without an errand would he turn his steps,
 Or wander here and there among the fields. 
One while he would speak lightly of his babes
 And with a cruel tongue, at other times
 He played with them wild freaks of merriment,
 And ’twas a piteous thing to see the looks
 Of the poor innocent children. ‘Every smile’,
 Said Margaret to me here beneath these trees,
 ‘Made my heart bleed.’ 
At this the old man paused,
 And looking up to those enormous elms
 He said, ‘’Tis now the hour of deepest noon. 
At this still season of repose and peace,
 This hour when all things which are not at rest
 Are cheerful, while this multitude of flies
 Fills all the air with happy melody,
 Why should a tear be in an old man’s eye? 
Why should we thus with an untoward mind,
 And in the weakness of humanity,
 From natural wisdom turn our hearts away,
 To natural comfort shut our eyes and ears,
 And, feeding on disquiet, thus disturb
 The calm of Nature with our restless thoughts?’ 

Second Part

He spake with somewhat of a solemn tone,
 But when he ended there was in his face
 Such easy cheerfulness, a look so mild,
 That for a little time it stole away
 All recollection, and that simple tale
 Passed from my mind like a forgotten sound. 
A while on trivial things we held discourse,
 To me soon tasteless. In my own despite
 I thought of that poor woman as of one
 Whom I had known and loved. He had rehearsed
 Her homely tale with such familiar power,
 With such an active countenance, an eye
 So busy, that the things of which he spake
 Seemed present, and, attention now relaxed,
 There was a heartfelt chillness in my veins. 
I rose, and turning from that breezy shade
 Went out into the open air, and stood
 To drink the comfort of the warmer sun. 
Long time I had not stayed ere, looking round
 Upon that tranquil ruin, I returned
 And begged of the old man that for my sake
 He would resume his story. 
He replied,
 ‘It were a wantonness, and would demand
 Severe reproof, if we were men whose hearts
 Could hold vain dalliance with the misery
 Even of the dead, contented thence to draw
 A momentary pleasure, never marked
 By reason, barren of all future good. 
But we have known that there is often found
 In mournful thoughts, and always might be found,
 A power to virtue friendly; were’t not so
 I am a dreamer among men, indeed
 An idle dreamer. ’Tis a common tale
 By moving accidents uncharactered,
 A tale of silent suffering, hardly clothed
 In bodily form, and to the grosser sense
 But ill adapted – scarcely palpable
 To him who does not think. But at your bidding
 I will proceed. 
While thus it fared with them
 To whom this cottage till that hapless year
 Had been a bless
                  ed
                 home, it was my chance
 To travel in a country far remote;
 And glad I was when, halting by yon gate
 That leads from the green lane, again I saw
 These lofty elm-trees. Long I did not rest –
 With many pleasant thoughts I cheered my way
 O’er the flat common. At the door arrived,
 I knocked, and when I entered, with the hope
 Of usual greeting, Margaret looked at me
 A little while, then turned her head away
 Speechless, and sitting down upon a chair
 Wept bitterly. I wist not what to do,
 Or how to speak to her. Poor wretch, at last
 She rose from off her seat, and then, oh sir,
 I cannot tell how she pronounced my name. 
With fervent love, and with a face of grief
 Unutterably helpless, and a look
 That seemed to cling upon me, she enquired
 If I had seen her husband. As she spake
 A strange surprise and fear came to my heart,
 Nor had I power to answer ere she told
 That he had disappeared – just two months gone,
 He left his house. Two wretched days had passed,
 And on the third by the first break of light,
 Within her casement full in view she saw
 A purse of gold. “I trembled at the sight”,
 Said Margaret, “for I knew it was his hand
 That placed it there. And on that very day
 By one, a stranger, from my husband sent,
 The tidings came that he had joined a troop
 Of soldiers going to a distant land. 
He left me thus. Poor man, he had not heart
 To take a farewell of me, and he feared
 That I should follow with my babes, and sink
 Beneath the misery of a soldier’s life.” 

This tale did Margaret tell with many tears,
 And when she ended I had little power
 To give her comfort, and was glad to take
 Such words of hope from her own mouth as served
 To cheer us both. But long we had not talked
 Ere we built up a pile of better thoughts,
 And with a brighter eye she looked around
 As if she had been shedding tears of joy. 
We parted. It was then the early spring;
 I left her busy with her garden-tools,
 And well remember, o’er that fence she looked,
 And, while I paced along the foot-way path,
 Called out and sent a blessing after me,
 With tender cheerfulness, and with a voice
 That seemed the very sound of happy thoughts. 

I roved o’er many a hill and many a dale
 With this my weary load, in heat and cold,
 Through many a wood and many an open ground,
 In sunshine or in shade, in wet or fair,
 Now blithe, now drooping, as it might befall;
 My best companions now the driving winds
 And now the “trotting brooks” and whispering trees,
 And now the music of my own sad steps,
 With many a short-lived thought that passed between
 And disappeared. 
I came this way again
 Towards the wane of summer, when the wheat
 Was yellow, and the soft and bladed grass
 Sprang up afresh and o’er the hayfield spread
 Its tender green. When I had reached the door
 I found that she was absent. In the shade,
 Where we now sit, I waited her return. 
Her cottage in its outward look appeared
 As cheerful as before, in any show
 Of neatness little changed – but that I thought
 The honeysuckle crowded round the door
 And from the wall hung down in heavier tufts,
 And knots of worthless stonecrop started out
 Along the window’s edge, and grew like weeds
 Against the lower panes. I turned aside
 And strolled into her garden. It was changed. 
The unprofitable bindweed spread his bells
 From side to side, and with unwieldy wreathes
 Had dragged the rose from its sustaining wall
 And bent it down to earth. The border tufts,
 Daisy, and thrift, and lowly camomile,
 And thyme, had straggled out into the paths
 Which they were used to deck. 
Ere this an hour
 Was wasted. Back I turned my restless steps,
 And as I walked before the door it chanced
 A stranger passed, and guessing whom I sought,
 He said that she was used to ramble far. 
The sun was sinking in the west, and now
 I sat with sad impatience. From within
 Her solitary infant cried aloud. 
The spot though fair seemed very desolate –
 The longer I remained more desolate –
 And looking round I saw the corner-stones,
 Till then unmarked, on either side the door
 With dull red stains discoloured, and stuck o’er
 With tufts and hairs of wool, as if the sheep
 That feed upon the commons thither came
 Familiarly, and found a couching-place
 Even at her threshold. 
The house-clock struck eight:
 I turned and saw her distant a few steps. 
Her face was pale and thin, her figure too
 Was changed. As she unlocked the door she said,
 It grieves me you have waited here so long,
 But in good truth I’ve wandered much of late,
 And sometimes – to my shame I speak – have need
 Of my best prayers to bring me back again.” 
While on the board she spread our evening meal
 She told me she had lost her elder child,
 That he for months had been a serving-boy,
 Apprenticed by the parish. “I perceive
 You look at me, and you have cause. Today
 I have been travelling far, and many days
 About the fields I wander, knowing this
 Only, that what I seek I cannot find. 
And so I waste my time: for I am changed,
 And to myself”, said she, “have done much wrong,
 And to this helpless infant. I have slept
 Weeping, and weeping I have waked. My tears
 Have flowed as if my body were not such
 As others are, and I could never die. 
But I am now in mind and in my heart
 More easy, and I hope”, said she, “that Heaven
 Will give me patience to endure the things
 Which I behold at home.” 
It would have grieved
 Your very soul to see her. Sir, I feel
 The story linger in my heart. I fear
 ’Tis long and tedious, but my spirit clings
 To that poor woman. So familiarly
 Do I perceive her manner and her look
 And presence, and so deeply do I feel
 Her goodness, that not seldom in my walks
 A momentary trance comes over me
 And to myself I seem to muse on one
 By sorrow laid asleep or borne away,
 A human being destined to awake
 To human life, or something very near
 To human life, when he shall come again
 For whom she suffered. Sir, it would have grieved
 Your very soul to see her: evermore
 Her eyelids drooped, her eyes were downward cast,
 And when she at her table gave me food
 She did not look at me. Her voice was low,
 Her body was subdued. In every act
 Pertaining to her house-affairs appeared
 The careless stillness which a thinking mind
 Gives to an idle matter. Still she sighed,
 But yet no motion of the breast was seen,
 No heaving of the heart. While by the fire
 We sat together, sighs came on my ear –
 I knew not how, and hardly whence, they came. 
I took my staff, and when I kissed her babe
 The tears stood in her eyes. I left her then
 With the best hope and comfort I could give:
 She thanked me for my will, but for my hope
 It seemed she did not thank me. 
I returned
 And took my rounds along this road again
 Ere on its sunny bank the primrose flower
 Had chronicled the earliest day of spring. 
I found her sad and drooping. She had learned
 No tidings of her husband. If he lived,
 She knew not that he lived: if he were dead,
 She knew not he was dead. She seemed the same
 In person or appearance, but her house
 Bespoke a sleepy hand of negligence. 
The floor was neither dry nor neat, the hearth
 Was comfortless,
 The windows too were dim, and her few books,
 Which one upon the other heretofore
 Had been piled up against the corner-panes
 In seemly order, now with straggling leaves
 Lay scattered here and there, open or shut,
 As they had chanced to fall. Her infant babe
 Had from its mother caught the trick of grief,
 And sighed among its playthings. Once again
 I turned towards the garden-gate, and saw
 More plainly still that poverty and grief
 Were now come nearer to her. The earth was hard,
 With weeds defaced and knots of withered grass;
 No ridges there appeared of clear black mould,
 No winter greenness. Of her herbs and flowers
 It seemed the better part were gnawed away
 Or trampled on the earth. A chain of straw,
 Which had been twisted round the tender stem
 Of a young apple-tree, lay at its root;
 The bark was nibbled round by truant sheep. 
Margaret stood near, her infant in her arms,
 And, seeing that my eye was on the tree,
 She said, “I fear it will be dead and gone
 Ere Robert come again.” 
Towards the house
 Together we returned, and she enquired
 If I had any hope. But for her babe,
 And for her little friendless boy, she said,
 She had no wish to live – that she must die
 Of sorrow. Yet I saw the idle loom
 Still in its place. His Sunday garments hung
 Upon the self-same nail, his very staff
 Stood undisturbed behind the door. And when
 I passed this way beaten by autumn winds,
 She told me that her little babe was dead
 And she was left alone. That very time,
 I yet remember, through the miry lane
 She walked with me a mile, when the bare trees
 Trickled with foggy damps, and in such sort
 That any heart had ached to hear her, begged
 That wheresoe’er I went I still would ask
 For him whom she had lost. We parted then,
 Our final parting; for from that time forth
 Did many seasons pass ere I returned
 Into this tract again. 
Five tedious years
 She lingered in unquiet widowhood,
 A wife and widow. Needs must it have been
 A sore heart-wasting. I have heard, my friend,
 That in that broken arbour she would sit
 The idle length of half a sabbath-day –
 There, where you see the toadstool’s lazy head –
 And when a dog passed by she still would quit
 The shade and look abroad. On this old bench
 For hours she sat, and evermore her eye
 Was busy in the distance, shaping things
 Which made her heart beat quick. Seest thou that path? 
The green-sward now has broken its grey line –
 There to and fro she paced through many a day
 Of the warm summer, from a belt of flax
 That girt her waist, spinning the long-drawn thread
 With backward steps. Yet ever as there passed
 A man whose garments showed the soldier’s red,
 Or crippled mendicant in sailor’s garb,
 The little child who sat to turn the wheel
 Ceased from his toil, and she, with faltering voice,
 Expecting still to learn her husband’s fate,
 Made many a fond enquiry; and when they
 Whose presence gave no comfort, were gone by,
 Her heart was still more sad. And by yon gate,
 Which bars the traveller’s road, she often stood
 And, when a stranger horseman came, the latch
 Would lift, and in his face look wistfully,
 Most happy if from aught discovered there
 Of tender feeling she might dare repeat
 The same sad question. 
Meanwhile her poor hut
 Sunk to decay; for he was gone, whose hand
 At the first nippings of October frost
 Closed up each chink, and with fresh bands of straw
 Chequered the green-grown thatch. And so she lived
 Through the long winter, reckless and alone,
 Till this reft house, by frost, and thaw, and rain,
 Was sapped; and when she slept, the nightly damps
 Did chill her breast, and in the stormy day
 Her tattered clothes were ruffled by the wind
 Even at the side of her own fire. Yet still
 She loved this wretched spot, nor would for worlds
 Have parted hence; and still that length of road,
 And this rude bench, one torturing hope endeared,
 Fast rooted at her heart. And here, my friend,
 In sickness she remained; and here she died,
 Last human tenant of these ruined walls.’ 

The old man ceased; he saw that I was moved. 
From that low bench rising instinctively
 I turned aside in weakness, nor had power
 To thank him for the tale which he had told. 
I stood, and leaning o’er the garden gate
 Reviewed that woman’s sufferings; and it seemed
 To comfort me while with a brother’s love
 I blest her in the impotence of grief. 
At length towards the cottage I returned
 Fondly, and traced with milder interest
 That secret spirit of humanity
 Which, mid the calm oblivious tendencies
 Of Nature, mid her plants, her weeds and flowers,
 And silent overgrowings, still survived. 
The old man seeing this resumed, and said,
 ‘My friend, enough to sorrow have you given,
 The purposes of wisdom ask no more:
 Be wise and cheerful, and no longer read
 The forms of things with an unworthy eye. 
She sleeps in the calm earth, and peace is here. 
I well remember that those very plumes
 Those weeds, and the high spear-grass on that wall,
 By mist and silent raindrops silvered o’er,
 As once I passed did to my mind convey
 So still an image of tranquillity,
 So calm and still, and looked so beautiful
 Amid the uneasy thoughts which filled my mind,
 That what we feel of sorrow and despair
 From ruin and from change, and all the grief
 The passing shows of being leave behind,
 Appeared an idle dream that could not live
 Where meditation was. I turned away,
 And walked along my road in happiness.’ 

He ceased. By this the sun declining shot
 A slant and mellow radiance, which began
 To fall upon us where beneath the trees
 We sat on that low bench. And now we felt,
 Admonished thus, the sweet hour coming on:
 A linnet warbled from those lofty elms,
 A thrush sang loud, and other melodies
 At distance heard peopled the milder air. 
The old man rose and hoisted up his load;
 Together casting then a farewell look
 Upon those silent walls, we left the shade,
 And ere the stars were visible attained
 A rustic inn, our evening resting-place. 
