A Wasted Evening

Recently I was alone one night at the Comédie Française,
Or just about alone — not a very successful playwright.
Molière, that’s all it was; and we all know how that colossal
Bungler, who happened one day to write the Misanthrope, never
Had any sense of the pretty art of tickling the fancy
And concocting a well-cooked denouement done to a nicety.
Thanks be to God, our authors today use different methods;
We have more of a taste for some sort of à la mode drama
Where the intrigue, entangled and wreathed in festoon on festoon, keeps
Whirling around in doggerel verse like a teasing conundrum.

And yet, in spite of it all, I listened to those plain harmonics,
Listened to commonsense giving a voice to genius,
And I marvelled to see what love for the sheer bitter truth this
Fellow, so proud in his very simplicity, must have possessed; what
True and magnificent knowledge of all the ways of the world, what
Virile wit — such interminglings of tragedy and profundity
That, when you break into laughter, you really ought to be weeping!
Is it, I asked myself, is it enough to marvel?
Is it enough to come here, one evening, simply at random,
Come here and listen to Nature’s cry in the depths of the soul, and
Brush a few tears away, and then depart in this manner,
Without the slightest result — whatever else we are doing?

All the same, I kept looking around, eyeing the gallery,
Glancing hither and thither, while I was deep in this daydream,
And I could see straight ahead, swaying back and forth gaily,
Somebody’s pretty and slender neck underneath her black tresses;
And, as I watched this ebony in its ivory setting,
Some little passage of poetry written by André Chénier,
Something now almost unknown, fresh as chance, a refrain never finished,
Not so much written as dreamed, came to my memory, singing.
Yes, I dared to recall it, even in Molière’s presence;
Surely his mighty spirit couldn’t have been offended;
And, as I kept on listening, I was murmuring softly,
Watching the little girl, who scarcely could have suspected:
“Under your lovely head, a fair and delicate neck is
Bending; the very snows would be eclipsed by its brightness.”

After which I reflected (this is the way that our thoughts go)
How we have now abandoned the frankness of former ages,
How we have grown so subtle, so witty and so sardonic —
Which, in the end, might make you believe we’re utterly heartless;
How this expanse of empty seats in the presence of Molière
Must be a very sad thing, shameful and shocking and scandalous;
How (in the words of the song) it is indeed “high time” for us
Either to leave this age or else to get the better of it.
What analogy can we find for this grubby theatre,
For the disgraceful state into which the Muse has fallen?
Cowardice holds us back — and idiots go around saying
That, underneath this old sun, everything has been accomplished;
As if the follies and foibles of our human species
Didn’ t spring up anew every year, and every week too!
Our era has its own customs, ergo its truths to be told; and
Someone who dares to speak them will always gain an audience.

Oh, I would dare to speak out, if I thought I was good at speaking,
Yes, I would dare to pick up the lash of satire afresh, and
Dress him in black, that fellow who used to wear the green ribbons,
Who used to lose his temper over a few wretched verses.
If he came back today to the fine city of Paris,
He would find better things to arouse his bilious anger
Than a not-very-good woman and a not-very-good sonnet;
Now we have other things that need to be flushed down the toilet.
Well, dear master of us all, if your tomb will not open,
Let me at least delve into your fleetingly rekindled ashes,
Let me at least find a spark, and imitate your example!
Teach me the tone of voice in which you spoke with such boldness
When you uttered the truth — your one and only passion;
Then, to make myself heard without possessing your genius,
I shall at least have some of your courage and indignation!

So I indulged the idea — merely a silly daydream.
Meanwhile, in front of me, still by the side of her mother,
There was the little girl with her delicate fair neck swaying
Daintily to and fro beneath those long black tresses.
After the entertainment was over, the unknown charmer
Rose, and the lovely neck and partially naked shoulder
Vanished from sight; the hand slipped into its muff; and when I
Had seen her disappear inside the door of her own home —
Then I discovered that I had simply been following her.
Well, there you have it, my ffiend — that is my whole life story:
All the time that my spirit was yearning for its desires, my
Body had yearnings too, alas! and kept following beauty;
And, when at last I woke out of the dream I had cherished,
All that I still retained was a single precious image:
“Under your lovely head, a fair and delicate neck is
Bending; the very snows would be eclipsed by its brightness.”
