English Bards and Scotch Reviewers

[Ll. 1 – 38, 85 – 148]

Time was, ere yet in these degenerate days
 Ignoble themes obtained mistaken praise,
 When sense and wit, with poesy allied –
 No fabled graces – flourished side by side,
 From the same fount their inspiration drew,
 And, reared by taste, bloomed fairer as they grew. 
Then in this happy isle a Pope’s pure strain
 Sought the rapt soul to charm, nor sought in vain –
 A polished nation’s praise aspired to claim,
 And raised the people’s, as the poet’s, fame. 
Like him great Dryden poured the tide of song,
 In stream less smooth indeed, yet doubly strong. 
Then Congreve’s scenes could cheer, or Otway’s melt –
 For nature then an English audience felt. 
But why these names, or greater still, retrace,
 When all to feebler bards resign their place? 
Yet to such times our lingering looks are cast,
 When taste and reason with those times are past. 
No, look around, and turn each trifling page,
 Survey the precious works that please the age! 
This truth at least let satire’s self allow,
 No dearth of bards can be complained of now:
 The loaded press beneath her labour groans,
 And printer’s devils shake their weary bones,
 While Southey’s epics cram the creaking shelves,
 And Little’s lyrics shine in hot-pressed twelves! 
Behold in various throngs the scribbling crew,
 For notice eager, pass in long review:
 Each spurs his jaded Pegasus apace,
 And rhyme and blank maintain an equal race;
 Sonnets on sonnets crowd, and ode on ode,
 And Tales of Terror jostle on the road. 
Immeasurable measures move along,
 For simpering Folly loves a varied song
 To strange, mysterious Dullness still the friend),
 Admires the strain she cannot comprehend! 
Thus Lays of Minstrels – may they be the last! –
 On half-strung harps, whine mournful to the blast. 

With eagle-pinions soaring to the skies,
 Behold the ballad-monger Southey rise –
 To him let Camoëns, Milton, Tasso yield –
 Whose annual strains like armies take the field. 
First in the ranks let Joan of Arc advance,
 The scourge of England and the boast of France! 
Though burnt by wicked Bedford as a witch,
 Behold her statue placed in glory’s niche –
 Her fetters burst, and just released from prison,
 A virgin Phoenix from her ashes risen. 
Next see tremendous Thalaba come on,
 Arabia’s monstrous, wild and wondrous son,
 Domdaniel’s dread destroyer, who o’erthrew
 More mad magicians than the world e’er knew. 
Immortal hero, all thy foes o’ercome,
 For ever reign – the rival of Tom Thumb! 
Since startled metre fled before thy face,
 Well wert thou doomed the last of all thy race,
 Well might triumphant genii bear thee hence,
 Illustrious conqueror of common sense! 
Now, last and greatest, Madoc spreads his sails,
 Cacique in Mexico, and Prince in Wales;
 Tells us strange tales, as other travellers do,
 More old than Mandeville’s, and not so true! 
Oh Southey, Southey, cease thy varied song –
 A bard may chant too often and too long! 
As thou art strong in verse, in mercy spare –
 A fourth, alas, were more than we could bear! 
But if, in spite of all the world can say,
 Thou still will verseward plod thy weary way,
 If still in Berkeley-ballads most uncivil
 Thou wilt devote old women to the Devil
 (The babe unborn thy dread intent may rue),
 ‘God help thee’, Southey, and thy readers too! 
Next comes the dull disciple of thy school,
 That mild apostate from poetic rule,
 The simple Wordsworth, framer of a lay
 As soft as evening in his favourite May,
 Who warns his friend ‘to shake off toil and trouble,
 And quit his books, for fear of growing double’;
 Who both by precept and example shows
 That prose is verse, and verse is merely prose,
 Convincing all (by demonstration plain)
 Poetic souls delight in prose insane,
 And Christmas-stories, tortured into rhyme,
 Contain the essence of the true sublime. 
Thus when he tells the tale of Betty Foy,
 The idiot mother of an ‘Idiot Boy’,
 A moon-struck silly lad who lost his way,
 And, like his bard, confounded night with day,
 So close on each pathetic part he dwells,
 And each adventure so sublimely tells,
 That all who view the ‘idiot in his glory’
 Conceive the bard the hero of the story! 
Shall gentle Coleridge pass unnoticed here,
 To turgid ode and tumid stanza dear? 
Though themes of innocence amuse him best,
 Yet still obscurity’s a welcome guest. 
If inspiration should her aid refuse
 To him who takes a pixy for a muse,
 Yet none in lofty numbers can surpass
 The bard who soars to elegize and ass! 
How well the subject suits his noble mind –
 A fellow-feeling makes us wondrous kind. 
