A Night in May

The Muse

O singer, take your lute and woo me with a kiss.
The hedge rose is about to burst its buds and bloom.
Spring shall be born tonight; the winds are catching fire.
The wagtail who awaits the daylight, will alight
As soon as it has found that shrubs are turning green.
O singer, take your lute and woo me with a kiss.

The Poet

How dark this valley! Did I see
An apparition floating by
Back there, above the forest’s trees?
I saw it rising from the meadow.
Its foot has grazed the flowered grass.
It is a strange, uncertain vision
That fades away and vanishes.

The Muse

My singer, take your lute, for on the lawn, the night
Lulls in its perfumed veils the gentle zephyr’s breath.
The rose, virgin as yet, jealously locks inside
Her heart the pearled hornet that, drunken, swoons and dies.
Listen! Now all is quiet; think of the one you love.
Tonight, under the linden, within the darkened bower,
A trace of dying light still lingers its farewell.
Tonight all will burst open: for nature never will
Desist and, full of scents of love and murmurings,
Is like the joyous bed of two about to wed.

The Poet

Why is my heart beating so loudly?
Why do I feel this agitation:
Terrified of what I feel?
Is someone knocking at my door?
Why does my lamp that feebly flickers
Blind me with its clarity?
Almighty God, my body trembles.
Who comes; who calls me? — No one’s there.
I am alone: the bells are ringing!
O solitude! O poverty!

The Muse

Singer, take up your lute: the wine of youthful ardor
Is fermenting tonight in the veins of our Lord.
Unrest is in my heart: delight oppresses it,
And the shift in the wind is burning on my lips.
O indolent young man — look, I am beautiful.
Our very first embrace: do you remember it?
When I saw you grow pale at the touch of my wing,
And you, tears in your eyes, surrendered in my arms?
You know that I consoled you from a bitter pain,
For, when still very young, you were dying of love.
Console me, then; tonight I die of expectation,
And, to survive till daylight, need to pray with you.

The Poet

Is it your voice that’s calling me,
My wayward Muse; could it be you,
Who like the flower called immortal
Are still the chaste and constant one
In whom I can respect myself?
Yes, it is you I see, my blonde,
My sister and my truest love.
In the depth of night I feel,
Emanating from your dress,
The golden rays of warmth that heal.

The Muse

Poet, take up your lute, for I, your constant friend,
Have seen you here tonight in your silent dejection
And, like a bird that swoops down from a higher region
To its clamoring brood, have come to weep with you.
Come, you are ill, my friend. Some lonely dread devours you
And, gnawing at your heart, I hear it echo there;
Visited by a love imperfect as this world,
A shade of passing pleasure, semblance of happiness.
Come, let us sing to God verses that stir your thoughts,
About the pleasures lost, the sorrows now behind you.
Let us soar on a kiss to a faraway land.
Haphazard, we’ll awake the echoes of your life.
We’ll tell each other tales of madness and of glory.
Together we’ll explore the first possible dream.
Let us invent somewhere a place where one forgets:
Away! We two alone will own the universe.
For here is Scotland’s green, and sun-burned Italy,
And my maternal Greece where honey tastes the sweetest,
Argos and Pteleon, city of hecatombs;
Or Messa the divine, beloved of the doves;
And now the wooded forehead of changing Peleon
And the blue Titarus and the shimmering bay
That reflects in its waters, mirror of the swan,
Glistening Camirus and white Oloosson.
Tell me what gilded song our voices shall intone?
And the tears we will shed — what is their origin?
This morning, when your eyes first opened to the light,
What thoughtful angel was there, leaning over you,
Shaking the lilacs stored in the folds of its dress,
And whispered in your ear the loves of which you dreamt?
Shall our song be of hope, of sorrow or of joy?
Shall we be drenching armored battalions in blood?
Will we suspend a lover on his silken ladder?
Or shall we set our steed charging into the wind?
Shall we reveal what hand will light, both night and day
The countless lamps that shine in the heavenly mansion?
Shall we call unto Tarquin, “It is time: the night falls!”
Shall we dive to the depth of the sea and pick pearls?
And the goat — shall we feed it on bitter ebony
Or show Melancholy the way to paradise?
Shall we follow the hunter on the steep incline?
The doe looks up at him and weeps to be let go;
The heather beckons and her fawns are newly born;
He grabs her, slits her throat, throws to the yapping pack
Of sweating dogs her heart, still beating and alive.
Shall we depict a girl with blazing cheeks, who is
About to go to Mass, a page trailing her steps,
And with wandering eye, sitting beside her mother,
Has forgotten the prayers that linger on her lips!
She trembles as she hears, echoing between pillars,
The clatter of the spurs of some intrepid knight.
Shall we exhort the heroes of a bygone France
And urge them to ascend the towers’ battlements
So that they may revive the ingenuous romance
That their forgotten glories taught the troubadours?
Shall we dress all in white a gentle elegy?
Shall we recount the life that led to Waterloo,
Of one who led to slaughter so vast a company
Before he was himself felled on a grassy hillock:
When eternal night’s herald brushed him with his wing
And folded both his hands across his steely breast?
Shall we with lofty satire be nailing to the lamp post
The name, sold seven times, of a pale pamphleteer,
Whom hunger motivates in his forgotten corner
As he shivers with envy and frustrated ambition
To insult one whose genius is full of expectation,
And to sully the laurels he tarnished with his breath?
Take your lute; take your lute! I’ll be silent no more,
For I am taking wing on the new breath of spring.
The wind is tugging at me; I’m rising in the air.
One single tear from you! God listens; time has come.

The Poet

If all you need, my sister sweet,
Is but one kiss from friendly lips
And only one tear from my eyes,
Gladly I will fulfill your wish;
And as you lift up to the skies
Remember how one time we loved.
For I do not sing of hope,
Nor of glory, nor of bliss,
Alas, not even of despair.
I will choose the silent part
So as to listen to the heart.

The Muse

Do you believe that I am like the autumn wind
That feeds itself on sorrow even in sepulchres,
And to whom all these tears are simply water drops?
O poet! I’m the one to wake you with a kiss.
The weed that I would tear out of this place — it is
Your idleness; your suffering belongs to God.
Whatever care it is that oppresses your youth:
Do let it widen there, since this fortunate wound
The somber seraphims inflicted on your heart;
For nothing makes us greater than the greatest pain.
But though you suffer it, O poet, do not think
That you must bury it and keep it to yourself.
The sweetest songs are those that sing of saddest thought.
Some memorable ones I know that are pure sobs.
Think of the pelican, who, tired of a long journey,
Returns at nightfall to the reeds he calls his home.
His starving young come running on the shore toward him
When they observe from far his landing on the water.
As they anticipate dividing up the prey
They rush to him with shrieks of joyous expectation.
Nodding their beaks, they shake their hideous, flapping goiters
While slowly he ascends a rock with measured pace
And shelters with his trailing wing his hungry brood.
He stares up at the sky, this mournful fisherman,
Lets blood flow from his side which he has torn for them.
In vain he searched the bottom of the sea for food.
The ocean was depleted and the beach deserted.
He offers them his heart as only nourishment.
In somber silence, lying on the parapet,
Paternal, he divides his entrails with his sons
And with sublime devotion endures his suffering.
He watches as his blood flows from his open breast.
Inebriated with a dreadful tenderness,
At this funereal feast he stumbles, then collapses.
Yet sometimes, sickened by this divine sacrifice,
Tired of dying like this in too long a torment,
He fears his children might not kill him altogether.
Then he raises himself, his wings spread to the wind
And striking at his heart, savagely he calls out
And rends the night with a farewell so desperate
That seabirds on the beach take fright and fly away
And lonely travelers still lingering on shore,
Feeling death in the air, confide their soul to God.
O poet, this is how the truest poets sing.
They leave it to the living to desport themselves;
As for the human banquets they serve up at their feasts,
Most often they resemble that of the pelican.
Whenever they recount their disappointed hopes,
Their tales of love and sadness, loss and forgetfulness,
This is not merely music with which to soothe the heart.
The verses that they sing are dangerous as swords
That trace through the bright air a dazzling arabesque
Which more often than not is tainted with their blood.

The Poet

O my insatiable muse,
Why do you ask so much of me?
A man facing the cutting blast
Will not be writing on the sand.
There was a time, now long since past
When youth, forever on my lips,
Burst into singing like a lark;
But I endured a bitter lot
Which, if I should approximate
To render in my fragile art
Would tear my instrument apart.
