Letter to Sara Hutchinson

4 April 1802

Well, if the bard was weatherwise, who made
 The grand old Ballad of Sir Patrick Spens,
 This night, so tranquil now, will not go hence
 Unroused by winds, that ply a busier trade
 Than that which moulds yon clouds in lazy flakes,
 Or the dull sobbing draught, that drones and rakes
 Upon the strings of this Eolian lute,
 Which better far were mute. 
For lo! the new moon, winter-bright
 And overspread with phantom light –
 With swimming phantom light o’erspread
 But rimmed and circled with a silver thread –
 I see the old moon in her lap, foretelling
 The coming on of rain and squally blast! 
Oh Sara, that the gust even now were swelling,
 And the slant night-shower driving loud and fast! 

A grief without a pang, void, dark, and drear,
 A stifling, drowsy, unimpassioned grief
 That finds no natural outlet, no relief
 In word, or sigh, or tear –
 This, Sara, well thou knowst,
 Is that sore evil which I dread the most,
 And oftenest suffer! In this heartless mood,
 To other thoughts by yonder throstle wooed,

That pipes within the larch-tree, not unseen
 (The larch, which pushes out in tassels green
 Its bundled leafits), wooed to mild delights
 By all the tender sounds and gentle sights
 Of this sweet primrose-month – and vainly wooed! 
Oh dearest Sara, in this heartless mood
 All this long eve, so balmy and serene,
 Have I been gazing on the western sky
 And its peculiar tint of yellow-green;
 And still I gaze and with how blank an eye! 
And those thin clouds above, in flakes and bars,
 That give away their motion to the stars;
 Those stars, that glide behind them, or between,
 Now sparkling, now bedimmed, but always seen;
 Yon crescent moon, as fixed as if it grew
 In its own cloudless, starless lake of blue –
 A boat becalmed, dear William’s sky-canoe! 
I see them all, so excellently fair! 
I see, not feel, how beautiful they are. 

My genial spirits fail –
 And what can these avail
 To lift the smothering weight from off my breast? 
It were a vain endeavour,
 Though I should gaze for ever
 On that green light which lingers in the west! 
I may not hope from outward forms to win
 The passion and the life whose fountains are within! 
These lifeless shapes, around, below, above,
 Oh what can they impart? 
When even the gentle thought that thou, my love,
 Art gazing now, like me,
 And seest the heaven I see –
 Sweet thought it is, yet feebly stirs my heart! 
Feebly, oh feebly – yet
 (I well remember it)
 In my first dawn of youth that fancy stole
 With many secret yearnings on my soul. 
At eve, sky-gazing in ‘ecstatic fit’,
 Alas (for cloistered in a city-school
 The sky was all I knew of beautiful),
 At the barred window often did I sit,

And oft upon the leaded school-roof lay,
 And to myself would say:
 There does not live the man so stripped of good affections
 As not to love to see a maiden’s quiet eyes
 Upraised and linking on sweet dreams, by dim connections
 To moon, or Evening Star, or glorious western skies –
 While yet a boy, this thought would so pursue me
 That often it became a kind of vision to me! 

Sweet thought, and dear of old
 To hearts of finer mould –
 Ten thousand times by friends and lovers blest! 
I spoke with rash despair,
 And, ere I was aware,
 The weight was somewhat lifted from my breast. 
Oh Sara, in the weather-fended wood –
 Thy loved haunt, where the stock-doves coo at noon –
 I guess, that thou hast stood
 And watched yon crescent, and its ghost-like moon. 
And yet, far rather in my present mood
 I would that thou’dst been sitting all this while
 Upon the sod-built seat of camomile –
 And, though thy robin may have ceased to sing,
 Yet needs for my sake must thou love to hear
 The beehive murmuring near,
 That ever-busy and most quiet thing
 Which I have heard at midnight murmuring. 

I feel my spirit moved,
 And, wheresoe’er thou be
 Oh Sister, oh beloved,
 Those dear mild eyes that see
 Even now the heaven I see –
 There is a prayer in them – it is for me! 
And I, dear Sara, I am blessing thee! 

It was as calm as this, that happy night
 When Mary, thou, and I together were,
 The low decaying fire our only light,
 And listened to the stillness of the air! 
Oh that affectionate and blameless maid,
 Dear Mary – on her lap my head she laid! 

Her hand was on my brow
 (Even as my own is now),
 And on my cheek I felt thy eye-lash play. 
Such joy I had that I may truly say,
 My spirit was awe-stricken with the excess
 And trance-like depth of its brief happiness. 

Ah fair remembrances, that so revive
 The heart, and fill it with a living power –
 Where were they, Sara? Or did I not strive
 To win them to me on the fretting hour –
 Then when I wrote thee that complaining scroll
 Which even to bodily sickness bruised thy soul! 
And yet thou blam’st thyself alone – and yet
 Forbidd’st me all regret! 

And must I not regret that I distressed
 Thee, best beloved who lovest me the best? 
My better mind had fled I know not whither,
 For oh, was this an absent friend’s employ
 To send from far both pain and sorrow thither
 Where still his blessings should have called down joy! 
I read thy guileless letter o’er again,
 I hear thee of thy blameless self complain,
 And only this I learn (and this, alas, I know),
 That thou art weak and pale with sickness, grief and pain,
 And I – I made thee so! 

Oh for my own sake I regret perforce
 Whatever turns thee, Sara, from the course
 Of calm well-being and a heart at rest! 
When thou, and with thee those whom thou lov’st best,
 Shall dwell together in one happy home,
 One house, the dear abiding home of all,
 I too will crown me with a coronal! 
Nor shall this heart in idle wishes roam
 Morbidly soft! 
No! Let me trust that I shall wear away
 In no inglorious toils the manly day,
 And only now and then, and not too oft,
 Some dear and memorable eve will bless
 Dreaming of all your loves and quietness. 

Be happy, and I need thee not in sight –
 Peace in thy heart, and quiet in thy dwelling,
 Health in thy limbs, and in thine eyes the light
 Of love, and hope, and honourable feeling. 
Where’er I am, I shall be well content –
 Not near thee, haply shall be more content! 
To all things I prefer the permanent! 
And better seems it for a heart like mine
 Always to know, than sometimes to behold,
 Their happiness and thine;
 For change doth trouble me with pangs untold! 
To see thee, hear thee, feel thee, then to part,
 Oh, it weighs down the heart! 
To visit those I love, as I love thee,
 Mary, and William, and dear Dorothy,
 It is but a temptation to repine –
 The transientness is poison in the wine,
 Eats out the pith of joy, makes all joy hollow,
 All pleasure a dim dream of pain to follow! 
My own peculiar lot, my household life,
 It is, and will remain, indifference or strife –
 While ye are well and happy, ’twould but wrong you
 If I should fondly yearn to be among you. 
Wherefore, oh wherefore, should I wish to be
 A withered branch upon a blossoming tree? 

But – let me say it, for I vainly strive
 To beat away the thought – but if thou pined,
 Whate’er the cause, in body or in mind,
 I were the miserablest man alive
 To know it and be absent! Thy delights
 Far off, or near, alike I may partake;
 But oh, to mourn for thee, and to forsake
 All power, all hope of giving comfort to thee –
 To know that thou art weak and worn with pain,
 And not to hear thee, Sara, not to view thee,
 Not sit beside thy bed,
 Not press thy aching head,
 Not bring thee health again
 (At least to hope, to try)
 By this voice, which thou lov’st, and by this earnest eye! 

Nay, wherefore did I let it haunt my mind,
 The dark distressful dream? 
I turn from it, and listen to the wind
 Which long has raved unnoticed. What a scream
 Of agony, by torture lengthened out,
 That lute sent forth! Oh thou wild storm without! 
Jagg’d rock, or mountain-pond, or blasted tree,
 Or pine-grove whither woodman never clomb,
 Or lonely house long held the witches’ home,
 Methinks were fitter instruments for thee,
 Mad lutanist, that in this month of showers,
 Of dark brown gardens and of peeping flowers,
 Mak’st Devil’s yule, with worse than wintry song
 The blossoms, buds, and timorous leaves among! 
Thou actor, perfect in all tragic sounds,
 Thou mighty poet, even to frenzy bold! 
What tell’st thou now about? 
’Tis of the rushing of an host in rout –
 And many groans from men with smarting wounds –
 At once they groan with smart, and shudder with the cold! 
’Tis hushed: there is a trance of deepest silence. 
Again! But all that sound, as of a rushing crowd,
 And groans and tremulous shudderings, all are over –
 And it has other sounds, and all less deep, less loud –
 A tale of less affright,
 And tempered with delight,
 As William’s self had made the tender lay:
 ’Tis of a little child
 Upon a heathy wild,
 Not far from home, but it has lost its way,
 And now groans low in utter grief and fear,
 And now screams loud, and hopes to make its mother hear! 

’Tis midnight, and small thoughts have I of sleep –
 Full seldom may my friend such vigils keep –
 Oh breathe she softly in her gentle sleep! 
Cover her, gentle sleep, with wings of healing. 
And be this tempest but a mountain-birth! 
May all the stars hang bright about her dwelling,
 Silent, as though they watched the sleeping earth! 
Healthful and light, my darling, mayst thou rise
 With clear and cheerful eyes –

And of the same good tidings to me send! 
For, oh, belovéd friend,
 I am not the buoyant thing I was of yore
 When, like an own child, I to joy belonged –
 For others mourning oft, myself oft sorely wronged,
 Yet bearing all things then, as if I nothing bore! 

Yes, dearest Sara, yes! 
There was a time when, though my path was rough,
 The joy within me dallied with distress,
 And all misfortunes were but as the stuff
 Whence fancy made me dreams of happiness;
 For hope grew round me like the climbing vine,
 And leaves and fruitage, not my own, seemed mine! 
But now ill tidings bow me down to earth –
 Nor care I that they rob me of my mirth,
 But oh, each visitation
 Suspends what nature gave me at my birth,
 My shaping spirit of imagination! 
I speak not now of those habitual ills
 That wear out life, when two unequal minds
 Meet in one house, and two discordant wills;
 This leaves me where it finds,
 Past cure and past complaint – a fate austere,
 Too fixed and hopeless to partake of fear! 

But thou, dear Sara (dear indeed thou art,
 My comforter! A heart within my heart!),
 Thou, and the few we love, though few ye be,
 Make up a world of hopes and fears for me. 
And if affliction, or distempering pain,
 Or wayward chance befall you, I complain
 Not that I mourn. Oh friends most dear, most true,
 Methinks to weep with you
 Were better far than to rejoice alone –
 But that my coarse domestic life has known
 No habits of heart-nursing sympathy,
 No griefs but such as dull and deaden me,
 No mutual mild enjoyments of its own,
 No hopes of its own vintage – none, oh none,
 Whence, when I mourned for you, my heart might borrow
 Fair forms and living motions for its sorrow. 
For not to think of what I needs must feel,
 But to be still and patient all I can,
 And haply by abstruse research to steal
 From my own nature all the natural man –
 This was my sole resource, my wisest plan! 
And that, which suits a part, infects the whole,
 And now is almost grown the temper of my soul. 

My little children are a joy, a love,
 A good gift from above! 
But what is bliss, that still calls up a woe
 And makes it doubly keen,
 Compelling me to feel, as well as know,
 What a most bless
                ed
               lot mine might have been. 
Those little angel-children – woe is me! –
 There have been hours, when feeling how they bind
 And pluck out the wing-feathers of my mind,
 Turning my error to necessity, I have half
 Wished they never had been born! 
That, seldom – but sad thoughts they always bring,
 And like the poet’s Philomel I sing
 My love-song with my breast against a thorn. 

With no unthankful spirit I confess
 This clinging grief too, in its turn, awakes
 That love, and father’s joy; but oh, it makes
 The love the greater, and the joy far less! 
These mountains too, these vales, these woods, these lakes,
 Scenes full of beauty and of loftiness
 Where all my life I fondly hoped to live –
 I were sunk low indeed, did they no solace give;
 But oft I seem to feel, and evermore I fear,
 They are not to me now the things, which once they were. 

Oh Sara, we receive but what we give,
 And in our life alone does Nature live. 
Ours is her wedding garment, ours her shroud –
 And would we aught behold of higher worth
 Than that inanimate cold world allowed
 To the poor loveless ever-anxious crowd,
 Ah, from the soul itself must issue forth
 A light, a glory, and a luminous cloud
 Enveloping the earth! 
And from the soul itself must there be sent
 A sweet and potent voice, of its own birth,
 Of all sweet sounds the life and element. 

Oh pure of heart, thou needst not ask of me
 What this strong music in the soul may be,
 What and wherein it doth exist,
 This light, this glory, this fair luminous mist,
 This beautiful and beauty-making power! 
Joy, innocent Sara! Joy, that ne’er was given
 Save to the pure, and in their purest hour –
 Joy, Sara, is the spirit and the power
 That, wedding Nature to us, gives in dower
 A new Earth and new Heaven
 Undreamt of by the sensual and the proud! 
Joy is that strong voice, joy that luminous cloud –
 We, we ourselves rejoice! 
And thence flows all that charms or ear or sight –
 All melodies the echoes of that voice,
 All colours a suffusion of that light. 

Sister and friend of my devoutest choice! 
Thou being innocent and full of love,
 And nested with the darlings of thy love,
 And feeling in thy soul, heart, lips, and arms
 Even what the conjugal and mother dove,
 That borrows genial warmth from those she warms,
 Feels in her thrilled wings, blessedly outspread –
 Thou, freed awhile from cares and human dread
 By the immenseness of the good and fair
 Which thou seest everywhere –
 Thus, thus shouldst thou rejoice! 
To thee would all things live from pole to pole,
 Their life the eddying of thy living soul. 
Oh dear! Oh innocent! Oh full of love! 
A very friend! A sister of my choice –
 Oh dear, as light and impulse from above,
 Thus mayst thou ever, evermore rejoice! 
