The Lyre and the Harp.

To M. Alph. de L.

The Lyre

Sleep, son of Apollo! with laurels he has crowned you,
Sleep in peace! the Sisters nine adore you as a king;
The Dreams of their nebulous choirs surround you;
Nearby you hear the Lyre sing!

The Harp

Wake up, young man, son of sorrow and no other!
Let dreams keep the day from your darkened eyes no more,
For during your sleep, a pauper, your brother,
Has sat in vain at your door!

The Lyre

The Muse opens your eyes, child.
Your youth is cherished by Fame,
And with immortal memory
They’ll crown your radiant name;
In vain will Saturn make threats:
Olympus was born from Parnassus!
The gods were made by poets!

The Harp

Man, your mother was a woman;
She wept over your cradle;
Suffer then. Your brief life gleams
And gutters like a candle.
God, your lord, with a sign of doom
Has traced your path on the earth
And marked your place on the tomb.

The Lyre

Sing! Jupiter reigns and the universe entreats him;
Venus sets Mars afire with a graceful sigh;
Iris sparkles in the air, Flora in the fields;
Sing! The immortal ones, from sunset to the dawn,
In three paces walk across the Sky.

The Harp

Pray! There is only one true God, just in his mercy,
By the fleetingness of time ceaselessly renewed;
All is achieved in him, through him all begins again;
His being fills the universe like a vast spirit;
The Eternal lives in the Infinite.

The Lyre

Your gentle Muse calls you to flee.
Seek refuge calm with trees and grass;
Mortals, whom the wise avoid,
Must endure this age of brass.
Come. Beside your tranquil Lares
You will see in distant towns
Discordant voices roar like seas.
What does a happy recluse care
That storms should devastate the earth,
If they only shake his trees!

The Harp

God, through whom all sins find grace,
Walks with those who serve him here.
Like John, who from the desert came,
To the faithless crowd appear!
Go to those ruled by the world;
Tell them of the rumbling thunder,
Reveal to them their Judge’s frown;
And to strike their ear the better
Let your voice rise up in pitch
Like rumor rolling through a town!

The Lyre

The eagle is the bird of the highest Deity.
From the Caucasus to Athos soaring in the air,
King of fire that creates and of fire that devours,
It contemplates the sun and rides the lightning flare!

The Harp

The Dove descends from the heaven that adores it,
And, veiling the Holy Spirit in its gaze of flames,
Dear to the Old Man as to the chosen Virgin,
Bears a branch in the ark, a God to the world proclaims!

The Lyre

Love! Eros reigns at Cnidus, Tartarus, Olympus;
His torch brings light to Sestus’ gentle beacon;
At Paris’ hand he levels Troy to smoking piles.
Then fly from beauty to beauty, change with their charms.
From Love only tears are born,
But Loves are brothers of Smiles!

The Harp

Heavenly Love forbids infernal Hatred.
For your pure heart seek out a virgin soul;
Cherish her, Jehovah cherished Israel.
Two beings that a sacred mystery unites
Pass lovingly over the earth
Like two angels in exile!

The Lyre

Enjoy yourself! The stream of shades
Is where the stream of life will end.
A wise man leaves his gloomy days
To the gods, or casts them to the wind.
When at last, like a pale dinner-guest,
Death unexpectedly arrives,
He takes his hand and bids him stay;
And laughing at his unknown fate,
He falls asleep in a dawnless night,
While dreaming of a gentle day!

The Harp

Help your brother when he staggers,
Weep if you should hear him sigh;
Keep watch with care, and pray with zeal;
Live while mindful you must die.
The sinner thinks, when he succumbs,
That nothingness is in the tomb,
For he lives in sensuality;
But when the fallen angel claims him,
He is terrified to be a soul,
And shudders at Eternity!

The poet listened, who had just begun his day,
To the two celestial voices far away,
And later sometimes made a feeble trial
To sing a hymn of Carmel in Pindus’ style.
