The Story of Rimini

[Canto III, ll. 482-604 (end)]

All the green garden, flower-bed, shade, and plot,
 Francesca loved but most of all this spot:
 Whenever she walked forth, wherever went
 About the grounds, to this at last she bent. 
Here she had brought a lute and a few books;
 Here would she lie for hours, with grateful looks,
 Thanking at heart the sunshine and the leaves,
 The summer rain-drops counting from the eaves,
 And all that promising, calm smile we see
 In Nature’s face, when we look patiently. 
Then would she think of Heaven; and you might hear
 Sometimes, when everything was hushed and clear,
 Her gentle voice from out those shades emerging,
 Singing the evening anthem to the Virgin. 
The gardeners and the rest, who served the place
 And blest – whenever they beheld – her face,
 Knelt when they heard it, bowing and uncovered,
 And felt as if in air some sainted beauty hovered. 

One day – ’twas on a summer afternoon,
 When airs and gurgling brooks are best in tune,
 And grasshoppers are loud, and day-work done,
 And shades have heavy outlines in the sun –
 The princess came to her accustomed bower
 To get her, if she could, a soothing hour,
 Trying, as she was used, to leave her cares
 Without, and slumberously enjoy the airs
 And the low-talking leaves, and that cool light
 The vines let in, and all that hushing sight
 Of closing wood seen through the opening door,
 And distant plash of waters tumbling o’er,
 And smell of citron blooms – and fifty luxuries more! 

She tried, as usual, for the trial’s sake –
 For even that diminished her heartache,
 And never yet (how ill soe’er at ease)
 Came she for nothing midst the flowers and trees. 
Yet somehow or another, on that day,
 She seemed to feel too lightly borne away –
 Too much relieved – too much inclined to draw
 A careless joy from everything she saw;
 And looking round her with a new-born eye,
 As if some tree of knowledge had been nigh,
 To taste of Nature, primitive and free,
 And bask at ease in her heart’s liberty. 

Painfully clear those rising thoughts appeared,
 With something dark at bottom that she feared;
 And snatching from the fields her thoughtful look,
 She reached o’er-head, and took her down a book,
 And fell to reading with as fixed an air,
 As though she had been wrapt since morning there. 

’Twas Launcelot of the Lake, a bright romance,
 That like a trumpet made young pulses dance,
 Yet had a softer note that shook still more. 
She had begun it but the day before,
 And read with a full heart, half sweet, half sad,
 How old King Ban was spoiled of all he had
 But one fair castle – how one summer’s day
 With his fair queen and child he went away
 To ask the great King Arthur for assistance;
 How, reaching by himself a hill at distance,
 He turned to give his castle a last look,
 And saw its far white face – and how a smoke,
 As he was looking, burst in volumes forth,
 And good King Ban saw all that he was worth,
 And his fair castle, burning to the ground,
 So that his wearied pulse felt over-wound,
 And he lay down, and said a prayer apart
 For those he loved, and broke his poor old heart. 
Then read she of the Queen with her young child,
 How she came up, and nearly had gone wild,
 And how, in journeying on in her despair,
 She reached a lake and met a lady there
 Who pitied her, and took the baby sweet
 Into her arms, when lo, with closing feet
 She sprang up all at once, like bird from brake,
 And vanished with him underneath the lake! 
The mother’s feelings we as well may pass –
 The fairy of the place that lady was,
 And Launcelot (so the boy was called) became
 Her inmate, till in search of knightly fame
 He went to Arthur’s court, and played his part
 So rarely, and displayed so frank a heart,
 That what with all his charms of look and limb,
 The Queen Genevra fell in love with him. 
And here, with growing interest in her reading,
 The princess, doubly fixed, was now proceeding. 

Ready she sat with one hand to turn o’er
 The leaf, to which her thoughts ran on before,
 The other propping her white brow, and throwing
 Its ringlets out, under the sky-light glowing. 
So sat she fixed; and so observed was she
 Of one, who at the door stood tenderly –
 Paulo – who, from a window seeing her
 Go straight across the lawn, and guessing where,
 Had thought she was in tears, and found, that day,
 His usual efforts vain to keep away. 
‘May I come in?’ said he. It made her start,
 That smiling voice – she coloured, pressed her heart
 A moment (as for breath), and then with free
 And usual tone said ‘Oh yes, certainly!’ 
There’s apt to be, at conscious times like these,
 An affectation of a bright-eyed ease,
 An air of something quite serene and sure,
 As if to seem so, was to be, secure:
 With this the lovers met, with this they spoke,
 With this they sat down to the self-same book,
 And Paulo, by degrees, gently embraced
 With one permitted arm her lovely waist;
 And both their cheeks, like peaches on a tree,
 Leaned with a touch together, thrillingly;
 And o’er the book they hung, and nothing said,
 And every lingering page grew longer as they read. 

As thus they sat, and felt with leaps of heart
 Their colour change, they came upon the part
 Where fond Genevra, with her flame long nurst,
 Smiled upon Launcelot when he kissed her first! 
That touch, at last, through every fibre slid,
 And Paulo turned, scarce knowing what he did,
 Only he felt he could no more dissemble,
 And kissed her, mouth to mouth, all in a tremble. 
Sad were those hearts, and sweet was that long kiss:
 Sacred be love from sight, whate’er it is! 
The world was all forgot, the struggle o’er –
 Desperate the joy! That day they read no more. 
