The Eolian Harp

My pensive Sara! – thy soft cheek reclined
 Thus on mine arm, most soothing sweet it is
 To sit beside our cot, our cot o’ergrown
 With white-flowered jasmine and the broad-leaved myrtle
 Meet emblems they of innocence and love),
 And watch the clouds, that late were rich with light,
 Slow saddening round, and mark the Star of Eve
 Serenely brilliant (such should wisdom be)
 Shine opposite. How exquisite the scents
 Snatched from yon bean-field – and the world so hushed! 
The stilly murmur of the distant sea
 Tells us of silence. 
And that simplest lute,
 Placed lengthways in the clasping casement – hark
 How, by the desultory breeze caressed
 Like some coy maid half yielding to her lover,
 It pours such sweet upbraiding as must needs
 Tempt to repeat the wrong! And now, its strings
 Boldlier swept, the long sequacious notes
 Over delicious surges sink and rise –
 Such a soft floating witchery of sound
 As twilight elfins make, when they at eve
 Voyage on gentle gales from Faery Land,
 Where melodies round honey-dropping flowers
 (Footless and wild, like birds of Paradise)
 Nor pause, nor perch, hovering on untamed wing! 

And thus, my love, as on the midway slope
 Of yonder hill I stretch my limbs at noon,
 Whilst through my half-closed eyelids I behold
 The sunbeams dance like diamonds on the main,
 And tranquil muse upon tranquillity,
 Full many a thought uncalled and undetained,
 And many idle flitting fantasies,
 Traverse my indolent and passive brain –
 As wild and various as the random gales
 That swell and flutter on this subject lute! 
And what if all of animated Nature
 Be but organic harps, diversely framed,
 That tremble into thought as o’er them sweeps,
 Plastic and vast, one intellectual breeze,
 At once the soul of each, and God of all? 
But thy more serious eye a mild reproof
 Darts, oh beloved woman – nor such thoughts,
 Dim and unhallowed, dost thou not reject –
 And biddest me walk humbly with my God. 

Meek daughter in the family of Christ,
 Well hast thou said – and holily dispraised
 These shapings of the unregenerate mind,
 Bubbles that glitter as they rise and break
 On vain Philosophy’s aye-babbling spring! 
For never guiltless may I speak of him,
 The Incomprehensible, save when with awe
 I praise him, and with faith that inly feels,
 Who with his saving mercies healéd me,
 A sinful and most miserable man,
 Wildered and dark, and gave me to possess
 Peace, and this cot, and thee, heart-honoured maid! 
