Don Juan

[Canto I, st. LIV. -CXVII., CXXXIII. -CLXXXVII.]

LIV.

Young Juan now was sixteen years of age,
 Tall, handsome, slender, but well knit; he seemed
 Active, though not so sprightly, as a page;
 And everybody but his mother deemed
 Him almost man; but she flew in a rage
 And bit her lips (for else she might have screamed)
 If any said so, for to be precocious
 Was in her eyes a thing the most atrocious. 

LV.

Amongst her numerous acquaintance, all
 Selected for discretion and devotion,
 There was the Donna Julia, whom to call
 Pretty were but to give a feeble notion
 Of many charms in her as natural
 As sweetness to the flower, or salt to ocean,
 Her zone to Venus, or his bow to Cupid
 But this last simile is trite and stupid). 

LVI.

The darkness of her oriental eye
 Accorded with her Moorish origin. 
Her blood was not all Spanish, by the by
 (In Spain, you know, this is a sort of sin):
 When proud Grenada fell, and, forced to fly,
 Boabdil wept, of Donna Julia’s kin
 Some went to Africa, some stayed in Spain –
 Her great great grandmamma chose to remain. 

LVII.

She married (I forget the pedigree)
 With an hidalgo, who transmitted down
 His blood less noble than such blood should be;
 At such alliances his sires would frown,
 In that point so precise in each degree
 That they bred in and in, as might be shown,
 Marrying their cousins – nay, their aunts and nieces,
 Which always spoils the breed, if it increases. 

LVIII.

This heathenish cross restored the breed again,
 Ruined its blood, but much improved its flesh;
 For, from a root the ugliest in old Spain
 Sprung up a branch as beautiful as fresh;
 The sons no more were short, the daughters plain –
 But there’s a rumour which I fain would hush:
 ’Tis said that Donna Julia’s grandmamma
 Produced her Don more heirs at love than law. 

LIX.

However this might be, the race went on
 Improving still through every generation,
 Until it centered in an only son,
 Who left an only daughter; my narration
 May have suggested that this single one
 Could be but Julia (whom on this occasion
 I shall have much to speak about), and she
 Was married, charming, chaste, and twenty-three. 

LX.

Her eye (I’m very fond of handsome eyes)
 Was large and dark, suppressing half its fire
 Until she spoke, then through its soft disguise
 Flashed an expression more of pride than ire,
 And love than either; and there would arise
 A something in them which was not desire,
 But would have been, perhaps, but for the soul
 Which struggled through and chastened down the whole. 

LXI.

Her glossy hair was clustered o’er a brow
 Bright with intelligence, and fair and smooth;
 Her eyebrow’s shape was like the aerial bow,
 Her cheek all purple with the beam of youth,
 Mounting, at times, to a transparent glow,
 As if her veins ran lightning; she, in sooth,
 Possessed an air and grace by no means common,
 Her stature tall – I hate a dumpy woman. 

LXII.

Wedded she was some years, and to a man
 Of fifty – and such husbands are in plenty –
 And yet, I think, instead of such a ONE
 ’Twere better to have TWO of five and twenty,
 Especially in countries near the sun:
 And now I think on’t, mi vien in mente,
 Ladies even of the most uneasy virtue
 Prefer a spouse whose age is short of thirty. 

LXIII.

’Tis a sad thing, I cannot choose but say,
 And all the fault of that indecent sun
 Who cannot leave alone our helpless clay
 But will keep baking, broiling, burning on,
 That howsoever people fast and pray
 The flesh is frail, and so the soul undone:
 What men call gallantry, and gods adultery,
 Is much more common where the climate’s sultry. 

LXIV.

Happy the nations of the moral north! 
Where all is virtue, and the winter season
 Sends sin, without a rag on, shivering forth
 (’Twas snow that brought St Anthony to reason);
 Where juries cast up what a wife is worth
 By laying whate’er sum, in mulct, they please on
 The lover, who must pay a handsome price
 Because it is a marketable vice. 

LXV.

Alfonso was the name of Julia’s lord,
 A man well looking for his years, and who
 Was neither much beloved, nor yet abhorred;
 They lived together as most people do,
 Suffering each other’s foibles by accord,
 And not exactly either one or two;
 Yet he was jealous, though he did not show it,
 For jealousy dislikes the world to know it. 

LXVI.

Julia was – yet I never could see why –
 With Donna Inez quite a favourite friend;
 Between their tastes there was small sympathy,
 For not a line had Julia ever penned. 
Some people whisper (but, no doubt, they lie,
 For malice still imputes some private end)
 That Inez had, ere Don Alfonso’s marriage,
 Forgot with him her very prudent carriage;

LXVII.

And that, still keeping up the old connection,
 Which time had lately rendered much more chaste,
 She took his lady also in affection. 
And certainly this course was much the best:
 She flattered Julia with her sage protection,
 And complimented Don Alfonso’s taste;
 And if she could not (who can?) silence scandal,
 At least she left it a more slender handle. 

LXVIII.

I can’t tell whether Julia saw the affair
 With other people’s eyes, or if her own
 Discoveries made, but none could be aware
 Of this, at least no symptom e’er was shown;
 Perhaps she did not know, or did not care,
 Indifferent from the first, or callous grown:
 I’m really puzzled what to think or say,
 She kept her counsel in so close a way. 

LXIX.

Juan she saw, and, as a pretty child,
 Caressed him often, such a thing might be
 Quite innocently done, and harmless styled,
 When she had twenty years, and thirteen he;
 But I am not so sure I should have smiled
 When he was sixteen, Julia twenty-three,
 These few short years make wondrous alterations,
 Particularly amongst sun-burnt nations. 

LXX.

Whate’er the cause might be, they had become
 Changed; for the dame grew distant, the youth shy,
 Their looks cast down, their greetings almost dumb,
 And much embarrassment in either eye. 
There surely will be little doubt with some
 That Donna Julia knew the reason why,
 But as for Juan, he had no more notion
 Than he who never saw the sea of ocean. 

LXXI.

Yet Julia’s very coldness still was kind,
 And tremulously gentle her small hand
 Withdrew itself from his, but left behind
 A little pressure, thrilling, and so bland
 And slight, so very slight, that to the mind
 ’Twas but a doubt; but ne’er magician’s wand
 Wrought change with all Armida’s fairy art
 Like what this light touch left on Juan’s heart. 

LXXII.

And if she met him, though she smiled no more,
 She looked a sadness sweeter than her smile,
 As if her heart had deeper thoughts in store
 She must not own, but cherished more the while
 For that compression in its burning core. 
Even innocence itself has many a wile,
 And will not dare to trust itself with truth –
 And love is taught hypocrisy from youth. 

LXXIII.

But passion most dissembles yet betrays
 Even by its darkness; as the blackest sky
 Foretells the heaviest tempest, it displays
 Its workings through the vainly guarded eye,
 And in whatever aspect it arrays
 Itself, ’tis still the same hypocrisy;
 Coldness or anger, even disdain or hate,
 Are masks it often wears, and still too late. 

LXXIV.

Then there were sighs, the deeper for suppression,
 And stolen glances, sweeter for the theft,
 And burning blushes, though for no transgression,
 Tremblings when met, and restlessness when left;
 All these are little preludes to possession,
 Of which young passion cannot be bereft,
 And merely tend to show how greatly love is
 Embarrassed at first starting with a novice. 

LXXV.

Poor Julia’s heart was in an awkward state;
 She felt it going, and resolved to make
 The noblest efforts for herself and mate,
 For honour’s, pride’s, religion’s, virtue’s sake;
 Her resolutions were most truly great,
 And almost might have made a Tarquin quake;
 She prayed the Virgin Mary for her grace,
 As being the best judge of a lady’s case. 

LXXVI.

She vowed she never would see Juan more,
 And next day paid a visit to his mother,
 And looked extremely at the opening door,
 Which, by the Virgin’s grace, let in another;
 Grateful she was, and yet a little sore –
 Again it opens, it can be no other,
 ’Tis surely Juan now – No! I’m afraid
 That night the Virgin was no further prayed. 

LXXVII.

She now determined that a virtuous woman
 Should rather face and overcome temptation,
 That flight was base and dastardly, and no man
 Should ever give her heart the least sensation;
 That is to say, a thought beyond the common
 Preference that we must feel upon occasion
 For people who are pleasanter than others –
 But then they only seem so many brothers. 

LXXVIII.

And even if by chance (and who can tell –
 The devil’s so very sly) she should discover
 That all within was not so very well,
 And, if still free, that such or such a lover
 Might please perhaps, a virtuous wife can quell
 Such thoughts, and be the better when they’re over. 
And if the man should ask, ’tis but denial:
 I recommend young ladies to make trial. 

LXXIX.

And then there are such things as love divine,
 Bright and immaculate, unmixed and pure,
 Such as the angels think so very fine,
 And matrons, who would be no less secure,
 Platonic, perfect, ‘just such love as mine’:
 Thus Julia said – and thought so, to be sure –
 And so I’d have her think, were I the man
 On whom her reveries celestial ran. 

LXXX.

Such love is innocent, and may exist
 Between young persons without any danger –
 A hand may first, and then a lip be kissed –
 For my part, to such doings I’m a stranger,
 But hear these freedoms form the utmost list
 Of all o’er which such love may be a ranger:
 If people go beyond, ’tis quite a crime,
 But not my fault – I tell them all in time. 

LXXXI.

Love, then, but love within its proper limits,
 Was Julia’s innocent determination
 In young Don Juan’s favour. And to him, its
 Exertion might be useful on occasion,
 And (lighted at too pure a shrine to dim its
 Etherial lustre) with what sweet persuasion
 He might be taught, by love and her together –
 I really don’t know what, nor Julia either! 

LXXXII.

Fraught with this fine intention, and well fenced
 In mail of proof (her purity of soul),
 She, for the future, of her strength convinced,
 And that her honour was a rock, or mole,
 Exceeding sagely from that hour dispensed
 With any kind of troublesome control –
 But whether Julia to the task was equal
 Is that which must be mentioned in the sequel. 

LXXXIII.

Her plan she deemed both innocent and feasible,
 And, surely, with a stripling of sixteen
 Not scandal’s fangs could fix on much that’s seizable,
 Or if they did so, satisfied to mean
 Nothing but what was good, her breast was peaceable –
 A quiet conscience makes one so serene! 
Christians have burnt each other, quite persuaded
 That all the Apostles would have done as they did. 

LXXXIV.

And if in the mean time her husband died –
 But Heaven forbid that such a thought should cross
 Her brain, though in a dream – and then she sighed –
 Never could she survive that common loss! –
 But just suppose that moment should betide,
 I only say suppose it, inter nos
 (This should be entre nous, for Julia thought
 In French, but then the rhyme would go for nought),

LXXXV.

I only say suppose this supposition:
 Juan being then grown up to man’s estate
 Would fully suit a widow of condition,
 Even seven years hence it would not be too late;
 And in the interim (to pursue this vision)
 The mischief, after all, could not be great,
 For he would learn the rudiments of love –
 I mean the seraph way of those above. 

LXXXVI.

So much for Julia. Now we’ll turn to Juan,
 Poor little fellow, he had no idea
 Of his own case, and never hit the true one;
 In feelings quick as Ovid’s Miss Medea,
 He puzzled over what he found a new one,
 But not as yet imagined it could be a
 Thing quite in course, and not at all alarming,
 Which, with a little patience, might grow charming. 

LXXXVII.

Silent and pensive, idle, restless, slow,
 His home deserted for the lonely wood,
 Tormented with a wound he could not know,
 His, like all deep grief, plunged in solitude:
 I’m fond myself of solitude or so,
 But then, I beg it may be understood,
 By solitude I mean a sultan’s, not
 A hermit’s, with a harem for a grot. 

LXXXVIII.

‘Oh Love! in such a wilderness as this,
 Where transport and security entwine,
 Here is the empire of thy perfect bliss,
 And here thou art a god indeed divine.’ 
The bard I quote from does not sing amiss,
 With the exception of the second line,
 For that same twining ‘transport and security’
 Are twisted to a phrase of some obscurity. 

LXXXIX.

The poet meant, no doubt, and thus appeals
 To the good sense and senses of mankind,
 The very thing which everybody feels,
 As all have found on trial, or may find,
 That no one likes to be disturbed at meals
 Or love! I won’t say more about ‘entwined’
 Or ‘transport’, as we knew all that before,
 But beg ‘security’ will bolt the door. 

XC.

Young Juan wandered by the glassy brooks
 Thinking unutterable things; he threw
 Himself at length within the leafy nooks
 Where the wild branch of the cork forest grew;
 There poets find materials for their books,
 And every now and then we read them through,
 So that their plan and prosody are eligible,
 Unless, like Wordsworth, they prove unintelligible. 

XCI.

He, Juan (and not Wordsworth) so pursued
 His self-communion with his own high soul
 Until his mighty heart, in its great mood,
 Had mitigated part, though not the whole
 Of its disease; he did the best he could
 With things not very subject to control,
 And turned, without perceiving his condition,
 Like Coleridge, into a metaphysician. 

XCII.

He thought about himself, and the whole earth,
 Of man the wonderful, and of the stars,
 And how the deuce they ever could have birth;
 And then he thought of earthquakes, and of wars,
 How many miles the moon might have in girth,
 Of air-balloons, and of the many bars
 To perfect knowledge of the boundless skies –
 And then he thought of Donna Julia’s eyes. 

XCIII.

In thoughts like these true wisdom may discern
 Longings sublime, and aspirations high,
 Which some are born with, but the most part learn
 To plague themselves withal, they know not why:
 ’Twas strange that one so young should thus concern
 His brain about the action of the sky;
 If you think ’twas philosophy that this did,
 I can’t help thinking puberty assisted. 

XCIV.

He pored upon the leaves, and on the flowers,
 And heard a voice in all the winds; and then
 He thought of wood nymphs and immortal bowers,
 And how the goddesses came down to men:
 He missed the pathway, he forgot the hours,
 And when he looked upon his watch again,
 He found how much old Time had been a winner –
 He also found that he had lost his dinner. 

XCV.

Sometimes he turned to gaze upon his book,
 Boscan, or Garcilasso – by the wind
 Even as the page is rustled while we look,
 So by the poesy of his own mind
 Over the mystic leaf his soul was shook,
 As if ’twere one whereon magicians bind
 Their spells, and give them to the passing gale,
 According to some good old woman’s tale. 

XCVI.

Thus would he while his lonely hours away
 Dissatisfied, nor knowing what he wanted;
 Nor glowing reverie, nor poet’s lay,
 Could yield his spirit that for which it panted,
 A bosom whereon he his head might lay,
 And hear the heart beat with the love it granted,
 With – several other things, which I forget,
 Or which, at least, I need not mention yet. 

XCVII.

Those lonely walks, and lengthening reveries,
 Could not escape the gentle Julia’s eyes;
 She saw that Juan was not at his ease;
 But that which chiefly may, and must, surprise
 Is, that the Donna Inez did not tease
 Her only son with question or surmise;
 Whether it was she did not see, or would not,
 Or, like all very clever people, could not. 

XCVIII.

This may seem strange, but yet ’tis very common;
 For instance, gentlemen, whose ladies take
 Leave to o’erstep the written rights of woman
 And break the – which commandment is’t they break
 (I have forgot the number, and think no man
 Should rashly quote, for fear of a mistake) –
 I say, when these same gentlemen are jealous,
 They make some blunder, which their ladies tell us. 

XCIX.

A real husband always is suspicious,
 But still no less suspects in the wrong place,
 Jealous of some one who had no such wishes,
 Or pandering blindly to his own disgrace
 By harbouring some dear friend extremely vicious –
 The last indeed’s infallibly the case:
 And when the spouse and friend are gone off wholly,
 He wonders at their vice, and not his folly. 

C.

Thus parents also are at times short-sighted;
 Though watchful as the lynx, they ne’er discover,
 The while the wicked world beholds delighted,
 Young Hopeful’s mistress, or Miss Fanny’s lover,
 Till some confounded escapade has blighted
 The plan of twenty years, and all is over;
 And then the mother cries, the father swears,
 And wonders why the devil he got heirs. 

CI.

But Inez was so anxious, and so clear
 Of sight, that I must think, on this occasion,
 She had some other motive much more near
 For leaving Juan to his new temptation;
 But what that motive was, I shan’t say here;
 Perhaps to finish Juan’s education,
 Perhaps to open Don Alfonso’s eyes,
 In case he thought his wife too great a prize. 

CII.

It was upon a day, a summer’s day –
 Summer’s indeed a very dangerous season,
 And so is spring about the end of May –
 The sun, no doubt, is the prevailing reason;
 But whatsoe’er the cause is, one may say,
 And stand convicted of more truth than treason,
 That there are months which nature grows more merry in:
 March has its hares, and May must have its heroine. 

CIII.

’Twas on a summer’s day – the sixth of June –
 I like to be particular in dates,
 Not only of the age, and year, but moon;
 They are a sort of post-house, where the Fates
 Change horses, making history change its tune,
 Then spur away o’er empires and o’er states,
 Leaving at last not much besides chronology,
 Excepting the post-obits of theology. 

CIV.

’Twas on the sixth of June, about the hour
 Of half-past six – perhaps still nearer seven –
 When Julia sat within as pretty a bower
 As e’er held houri in that heathenish heaven
 Described by Mahomet, and Anacreon Moore,
 To whom the lyre and laurels have been given,
 With all the trophies of triumphant song –
 He won them well, and may he wear them long! 

CV.

She sat, but not alone; I know not well
 How this same interview had taken place,
 And even if I knew, I should not tell –
 People should hold their tongues in any case –
 No matter how or why the thing befell,
 But there were she and Juan, face to face. 
When two such faces are so, ’twould be wise,
 But very difficult, to shut their eyes. 

CVI.

How beautiful she looked! Her conscious heart
 Glowed in her cheek, and yet she felt no wrong. 
Oh Love, how perfect is thy mystic art,
 Strengthening the weak, and trampling on the strong,
 How self-deceitful is the sagest part
 Of mortals whom thy lure hath led along –
 The precipice she stood on was immense,
 So was her creed in her own innocence. 

CVII.

She thought of her own strength, and Juan’s youth,
 And of the folly of all prudish fears,
 Victorious virtue, and domestic truth,
 And then of Don Alfonso’s fifty years:
 I wish these last had not occurred, in sooth,
 Because that number rarely much endears,
 And through all climes, the snowy and the sunny,
 Sounds ill in love, whate’er it may in money. 

CVIII.

When people say, ‘I’ve told you fifty times’,
 They mean to scold, and very often do;
 When poets say, ‘I’ve written fifty rhymes’,
 They make you dread that they’ll recite them too;
 In gangs of fifty, thieves commit their crimes;
 At fifty love for love is rare, ’tis true,
 But then, no doubt, it equally as true is,
 A good deal may be bought for fifty Louis. 

CIX.

Julia had honour, virtue, truth, and love
 For Don Alfonso; and she inly swore,
 By all the vows below to powers above,
 She never would disgrace the ring she wore,
 Nor leave a wish which wisdom might reprove;
 And while she pondered this, besides much more,
 One hand on Juan’s carelessly was thrown,
 Quite by mistake – she thought it was her own;

CX.

Unconsciously she leaned upon the other,
 Which played within the tangles of her hair;
 And to contend with thoughts she could not smother,
 She seemed by the distraction of her air. 
’Twas surely very wrong in Juan’s mother
 To leave together this imprudent pair –
 She who for many years had watched her son so:
 I’m very certain mine would not have done so. 

CXI.

The hand which still held Juan’s, by degrees
 Gently, but palpably confirmed its grasp,
 As if it said ‘Detain me, if you please’;
 Yet there’s no doubt she only meant to clasp
 His fingers with a pure Platonic squeeze;
 She would have shrunk as from a toad, or asp,
 Had she imagined such a thing could rouse
 A feeling dangerous to a prudent spouse. 

CXII.

I cannot know what Juan thought of this,
 But what he did, is much what you would do;
 His young lip thanked it with a grateful kiss,
 And then, abashed at its own joy, withdrew
 In deep despair, lest he had done amiss,
 Love is so very timid when ’tis new:
 She blushed, and frowned not, but she strove to speak,
 And held her tongue, her voice was grown so weak. 

CXIII.

The sun set, and up rose the yellow moon –
 The devil’s in the moon for mischief – they
 Who called her chaste, methinks, began too soon
 Their nomenclature; there is not a day,
 The longest, not the twenty-first of June,
 Sees half the business in a wicked way
 On which three single hours of moonshine smile. 
And then she looks so modest all the while! 

CXIV.

There is a dangerous silence in that hour,
 A stillness, which leaves room for the full soul
 To open all itself, without the power
 Of calling wholly back its self-control;
 The silver light which, hallowing tree and tower,
 Sheds beauty and deep softness o’er the whole,
 Breathes also to the heart, and o’er it throws
 A loving languor, which is not repose. 

CXV.

And Julia sat with Juan, half embraced
 And half retiring from the glowing arm,
 Which trembled like the bosom where ’twas placed;
 Yet still she must have thought there was no harm,
 Or else ’twere easy to withdraw her waist;
 But then the situation had its charm,
 And then – God knows what next – I can’t go on;
 I’m almost sorry that I e’er begun. 

CXVI.

Oh Plato! Plato! You have paved the way,
 With your confounded fantasies, to more
 Immoral conduct by the fancied sway
 Your system feigns o’er the controlless core
 Of human hearts, than all the long array
 Of poets and romancers. You’re a bore,
 A charlatan, a coxcomb – and have been,
 At best, no better than a go-between! 

CXVII.

And Julia’s voice was lost, except in sighs,
 Until too late for useful conversation;
 The tears were gushing from her gentle eyes,
 I wish, indeed, they had not had occasion,
 But who, alas, can love, and then be wise? 
Not that remorse did not oppose temptation,
 A little still she strove, and much repented,
 And whispering ‘I will ne’er consent’ – consented. 

CXXXIII.

Man’s a phenomenon, one knows not what,
 And wonderful beyond all wondrous measure;
 ’Tis pity though, in this sublime world, that
 Pleasure’s a sin, and sometimes sin’s a pleasure! 
Few mortals know what end they would be at,
 But whether glory, power, or love, or treasure,
 The path is through perplexing ways, and when
 The goal is gained, we die, you know – and then? 

CXXXIV.

What then? I do not know. No more do you –
 And so good night! Return we to our story:
 ’Twas in November, when fine days are few,
 And the far mountains wax a little hoary
 And clap a white cape on their mantles blue,
 And the sea dashes round the promontory,
 And the wild breaker boils against the rock,
 And sober suns must set at five O’clock. 

CXXXV.

’Twas, as the watchmen say, a cloudy night;
 No moon, no stars, the wind was low or loud
 By gusts, and many a sparkling hearth was bright
 With the piled wood, round which the family crowd;
 There’s something cheerful in that sort of light,
 Even as a summer sky’s without a cloud:
 I’m fond of fire, and crickets, and all that,
 A lobster salad, and champagne, and chat. 

CXXXVI.

’Twas midnight, Donna Julia was in bed
 (Sleeping, most probably), when at her door
 Arose a clatter might awake the dead,
 If they had never been awoke before –
 And that they have been so we all have read,
 And are to be so, at the least, once more! 
The door was fastened, but with voice and fist
 First knocks were heard, then ‘Madam – Madam – hist! 

CXXXVII.

For God’s sake, Madam – Madam – here’s my master,
 With more than half the city at his back –
 Was ever heard of such a curst disaster! 
’Tis not my fault – I kept good watch. Alack! 
Do, pray undo the bolt a little faster –
 They’re on the stair just now, and in a crack
 Will all be here! Perhaps he yet may fly –
 Surely the window’s not so very high?’ 

CXXXVIII.

By this time Don Alfonso was arrived,
 With torches, friends, and servants in great number;
 The major part of them had long been wived,
 And therefore paused not to disturb the slumber
 Of any wicked woman, who contrived
 By stealth her husband’s temples to encumber:
 Examples of this kind are so contagious,
 Were one not punished, all would be outrageous! 

CXXXIX.

I can’t tell how, or why, or what suspicion
 Could enter into Don Alfonso’s head;
 But for a cavalier of his condition
 It surely was exceedingly ill-bred,
 Without a word of previous admonition,
 To hold a levée round his lady’s bed,
 And summon lackeys, armed with fire and sword,
 To prove himself the thing he most abhorred. 

CXL.

Poor Donna Julia! starting as from sleep,
 (Mind, that I do not say, she had not slept)
 Began at once to scream, and yawn, and weep;
 Her maid Antonia, who was an adept,
 Contrived to fling the bedclothes in a heap,
 As if she had just now from out them crept:
 I can’t tell why she should take all this trouble
 To prove her mistress had been sleeping double. 

CXLI.

But Julia mistress, and Antonia maid,
 Appeared like two poor harmless women, who,
 Of goblins, but still more of men, afraid,
 Had thought one man might be deterred by two,
 And therefore side by side were gently laid
 Until the hours of absence should run through
 And truant husband should return, and say
 ‘My dear, I was the first who came away.’ 

CXLII.

Now Julia found at length a voice, and cried
 In heaven’s name, Don Alfonso, what d’ye mean? 
Has madness seized you? Would that I had died
 Ere such a monster’s victim I had been! 
What may this midnight violence betide,
 A sudden fit of drunkenness or spleen? 
Dare you suspect me, whom the thought would kill? 
Search, then, the room!’ Alfonso said, ‘I will.’ 

CXLIII.

He searched, they searched, and rummaged everywhere,
 Closet and clothes-press, chest and window-seat,
 And found much linen, lace, and several pair
 Of stockings, slippers, brushes, combs, complete,
 With other articles of ladies fair,
 To keep them beautiful, or leave them neat:
 Arras they pricked, and curtains, with their swords,
 And wounded several shutters, and some boards. 

CXLIV.

Under the bed they searched, and there they found –
 No matter what – it was not that they sought! 
They opened windows, gazing if the ground
 Had signs or footmarks, but the earth said nought;
 And then they stared each others’ faces round:
 ’Tis odd, not one of all these seekers thought
 (And seems to me almost a sort of blunder),
 Of looking in the bed as well as under. 

CXLV.

During this inquisition Julia’s tongue
 Was not asleep: ‘Yes, search and search’, she cried,
 Insult on insult heap, and wrong on wrong! 
It was for this that I became a bride! 
For this in silence I have suffered long
 A husband like Alfonso at my side;
 But now I’ll bear no more, nor here remain,
 If there be law, or lawyers, in all Spain. 

CXLVI.

‘Yes, Don Alfonso! – husband now no more
 (If ever you indeed deserved the name),
 Is’t worthy of your years? You have threescore –
 Fifty, or sixty, it is all the same! 
Is’t wise or fitting causeless to explore
 For facts against a virtuous woman’s fame? 
Ungrateful, perjured, barbarous Don Alfonso,
 How dare you think your lady would go on so? 

CXLVII.

Is it for this I have disdained to hold
 The common privileges of my sex? –
 That I have chosen a confessor so old
 And deaf, that any other it would vex,
 And never once he has had cause to scold,
 But found my very innocence perplex
 So much, he always doubted I was married –
 How sorry you will be when I’ve miscarried! 

CXLVIII.

Was it for this that no cortejo ere
 I yet have chosen from out the youth of Seville? 
Is it for this I scarce went anywhere,
 Except to bull-fights, mass, play, rout, and revel? 
Is it for this, whate’er my suitors were,
 I favoured none-nay, was almost uncivil? 
Is it for this that General Count O’Reilly,
 Who took Algiers, declares I used him vilely? 

CXLIX.

Did not the Italian Musico Cazzani
 Sing at my heart six months at least in vain? 
Did not his countryman, Count Corniani,
 Call me the only virtuous wife in Spain? 
Were there not also Russians, English, many? 
The Count Strongstroganoff I put in pain,
 And Lord Mount Coffeehouse, the Irish peer,
 Who killed himself for love (with wine) last year. 

CL.

Have I not had two bishops at my feet? 
The Duke of Ichar, and Don Fernan Nunez,
 And is it thus a faithful wife you treat? 
I wonder in what quarter now the moon is! 
I praise your vast forbearance not to beat
 Me also, since the time so opportune is –
 Oh, valiant man! with sword drawn and cocked trigger,
 Now, tell me, don’t you cut a pretty figure? 

CLI.

Was it for this you took your sudden journey,
 Under pretence of business indispensable
 With that sublime of rascals your attorney,
 Whom I see standing there, and looking sensible
 Of having played the fool? Though both I spurn, he
 Deserves the worst, his conduct’s less defensible,
 Because, no doubt, ’twas for his dirty fee,
 And not from any love to you nor me. 

CLII.

If he comes here to take a deposition,
 By all means let the gentleman proceed;
 You’ve made the apartment in a fit condition –
 There’s pen and ink for you, sir, when you need –
 Let every thing be noted with precision,
 I would not you for nothing should be fee’d! 
But, as my maid’s undressed, pray turn your spies out.’ 
‘Oh!’ sobbed Antonia, ‘I could tear their eyes out.’ 

CLIII.

‘There is the closet, there the toilette, there
 The anti-chamber – search them under, over! 
There is the sofa, there the great armchair,
 The chimney (which would really hold a lover). 
I wish to sleep, and beg you will take care
 And make no further noise, till you discover
 The secret cavern of this lurking treasure –
 And when ’tis found, let me, too, have that pleasure. 

CLIV.

And now, Hidalgo! now that you have thrown
 Doubt upon me, confusion over all,
 Pray have the courtesy to make it known
 Who is the man you search for? How d’ye call
 Him? What’s his lineage? Let him but be shown! 
I hope he’s young and handsome – is he tall? 
Tell me – and be assured that since you stain
 My honour thus, it shall not be in vain! 

CLV.

At least, perhaps, he has not sixty years! 
At that age he would be too old for slaughter,
 Or for so young a husband’s jealous fears –
 Antonia! let me have a glass of water –
 I am ashamed of having shed these tears,
 They are unworthy of my father’s daughter;
 My mother dreamed not in my natal hour
 That I should fall into a monster’s power! 

CLVI.

Perhaps ’tis of Antonia you are jealous,
 You saw that she was sleeping by my side
 When you broke in upon us with your fellows! 
Look where you please – we’ve nothing, sir, to hide –
 Only another time, I trust, you’ll tell us,
 Or for the sake of decency abide
 A moment at the door, that we may be
 Dressed to receive so much good company! 

CLVII.

And now, sir, I have done, and say no more! 
The little I have said may serve to show
 The guileless heart in silence may grieve o’er
 The wrongs to whose exposure it is slow –
 I leave you to your conscience as before,
 ’Twill one day ask you why you used me so. 
God grant you feel not then the bitterest grief –
 Antonia! where’s my pocket-handkerchief?’ 

CLVIII.

She ceased, and turned upon her pillow. Pale
 She lay, her dark eyes flashing through their tears,
 Like skies that rain and lighten – as a veil,
 Waved and o’ershading her wan cheek, appears
 Her streaming hair. The black curls strive, but fail,
 To hide the glossy shoulder, which uprears
 Its snow through all – her soft lips lie apart,
 And louder than her breathing beats her heart. 

CLIX.

The Señor Don Alfonso stood confused;
 Antonia bustled round the ransacked room,
 And, turning up her nose, with looks abused
 Her master, and his myrmidons, of whom
 Not one, except the attorney, was amused –
 He, like Achates, faithful to the tomb,
 So there were quarrels, cared not for the cause,
 Knowing they must be settled by the laws. 

CLX.

With prying snub-nose, and small eyes, he stood,
 Following Antonia’s motions here and there,
 With much suspicion in his attitude. 
For reputations he had little care –
 So that a suit or action were made good –
 Small pity had he for the young and fair,
 And ne’er believed in negatives, till these
 Were proved by competent false witnesses. 

CLXI.

But Don Alfonso stood with downcast looks,
 And, truth to say, he made a foolish figure;
 When, after searching in five hundred nooks,
 And treating a young wife with so much rigour,
 He gained no point, except some self-rebukes,
 Added to those his lady with such vigour
 Had poured upon him for the last half-hour,
 Quick, thick, and heavy – as a thunder-shower. 

CLXII.

At first he tried to hammer an excuse,
 To which the sole reply were tears, and sobs,
 And indications of hysterics, whose
 Prologue is always certain throes, and throbs,
 Gasps, and whatever else the owners choose –
 Alfonso saw his wife, and thought of Job’s! 
He saw too, in perspective, her relations,
 And then he tried to muster all his patience. 

CLXIII.

He stood in act to speak, or rather stammer,
 But sage Antonia cut him short before
 The anvil of his speech received the hammer,
 With ‘Pray sir, leave the room, and say no more,
 Or madam dies!’ Alfonso muttered ‘Damn her’,
 But nothing else, the time of words was o’er –
 He cast a rueful look or two, and did
 (He knew not wherefore) that which he was bid. 

CLXIV.

With him retired his posse comitatus,
 The attorney last, who lingered near the door
 Reluctantly, still tarrying there as late as
 Antonia let him – not a little sore
 At this most strange and unexplained ‘hiatus’
 In Don Alfonso’s facts, which just now wore
 An awkward look. As he revolved the case
 The door was fastened in his legal face. 

CLXV.

No sooner was it bolted, than – oh shame! 
Oh sin! oh sorrow! and oh womankind! 
How can you do such things and keep your fame,
 Unless this world, and t’other too, be blind? 
Nothing so dear as an unfilched good name! 
But to proceed (for there is more behind) –
 With much heart-felt reluctance be it said,
 Young Juan slipped, half-smothered, from the bed. 

CLXVI.

He had been hid – I don’t pretend to say
 How, nor can I indeed describe the where
 (Young, slender, and packed easily, he lay,
 No doubt, in little compass, round or square) –
 But pity him I neither must nor may
 His suffocation by that pretty pair:
 ’Twere better, sure, to die so, than be shut
 With maudlin Clarence in his Malmsey butt. 

CLXVII.

And, secondly, I pity not, because
 He had no business to commit a sin,
 Forbid by heavenly, fined by human laws –
 At least ’twas rather early to begin! 
But at sixteen the conscience rarely gnaws
 So much as when we call our old debts in
 At sixty years, and draw the accounts of evil,
 And find a deuc
                  ed
                 balance with the Devil! 

CLXVIII.

Of his position I can give no notion –
 ’Tis written in the Hebrew Chronicle,
 How the physicians, leaving pill and potion,
 Prescribed, by way of blister, a young belle,
 When old King David’s blood grew dull in motion,
 And that the medicine answered very well. 
Perhaps ’twas in a different way applied,
 For David lived, but Juan nearly died! 

CLXIX.

What’s to be done? Alfonso will be back
 The moment he has sent his fools away. 
Antonia’s skill was put upon the rack,
 But no device could be brought into play –
 And how to parry the renewed attack? 
Besides, it wanted but few hours of day:
 Antonia puzzled; Julia did not speak,
 But pressed her bloodless lip to Juan’s cheek. 

CLXX.

He turned his lip to hers, and with his hand
 Called back the tangles of her wandering hair;
 Even then their love they could not all command,
 And half forgot their danger and despair:
 Antonia’s patience now was at a stand –
 ‘Come, come, ’tis no time now for fooling there!’ 
She whispered, in great wrath – ‘I must deposit
 This pretty gentleman within the closet. 

CLXXI.

Pray, keep your nonsense for some luckier night! 
Who can have put my master in this mood? 
What will become on’t? I’m in such a fright –
 The devil’s in the urchin, and no good! 
Is this a time for giggling – this a plight? 
Why, don’t you know that it may end in blood? 
You’ll lose your life, and I shall lose my place,
 My mistress, all – for that half-girlish face! 

CLXXII.

Had it but been for a stout cavalier
 Of twenty-five or thirty (come, make haste),
 But for a child, what piece of work is here! 
I really, madam, wonder at your taste
 (Come, sir, get in) – my Master must be near! 
There, for the present, at the least he’s fast,
 And, if we can but till the morning keep
 Our counsel – Juan, mind, you must not sleep!’ 

CLXXIII.

Now, Don Alfonso entering, but alone,
 Closed the oration of the trusty maid:
 She loitered, and he told her to be gone,
 An order somewhat sullenly obeyed;
 However, present remedy was none,
 And no great good seemed answered if she stayed:
 Regarding both with slow and sidelong view,
 She snuffed the candle, curtsied, and withdrew. 

CLXXIV.

Alfonso paused a minute, then begun
 Some strange excuses for his late proceeding –
 He would not justify what he had done,
 To say the best, it was extreme ill-breeding;
 But there were ample reasons for it (none
 Of which he specified in this his pleading) –
 His speech was a fine sample, on the whole,
 Of rhetoric, which the learn’d call rigmarole. 

CLXXV.

Julia said nought; though all the while there rose
 A ready answer, which at once enables
 A matron who her husband’s foible knows,
 By a few timely words to turn the tables,
 Which if it does not silence still must pose –
 Even if it should comprise a pack of fables:
 ’Tis to retort with firmness, and when he
 Suspects with one, do you reproach with three. 

CLXXVI.

Julia, in fact, had tolerable grounds
 (Alfonso’s loves with Inez were well known);
 But whether ’twas that one’s own guilt confounds –
 But that can’t be, as has been often shown
 A lady with apologies abounds –
 It might be that her silence sprang alone
 From delicacy to Don Juan’s ear,
 To whom she knew his mother’s fame was dear. 

CLXXVII.

There might be one more motive (which makes two):
 Alfonso ne’er to Juan had alluded –
 Mentioned his jealousy, but never who
 Had been the happy lover he concluded
 Concealed amongst his premises (’tis true,
 His mind the more o’er this its mystery brooded) –
 To speak of Inez now were, one may say,
 Like throwing Juan in Alfonso’s way! 

CLXXVIII.

A hint, in tender cases, is enough;
 Silence is best, besides there is a tact
 (That modern phrase appears to me sad stuff,
 But it will serve to keep my verse compact)
 Which keeps, when pushed by questions rather rough,
 A lady always distant from the fact –
 The charming creatures lie with such a grace,
 There’s nothing so becoming to the face. 

CLXXIX.

They blush, and we believe them; at least I
 Have always done so! ’Tis of no great use,
 In any case, attempting a reply,
 For then their eloquence grows quite profuse –
 And when at length they’re out of breath, they sigh,
 And cast their languid eyes down, and let loose
 A tear or two, and then we make it up:
 And then – and then – and then – sit down and sup. 

CLXXX.

Alfonso closed his speech, and begged her pardon,
 Which Julia half withheld, and then half granted,
 And laid conditions, he thought very hard, on –
 Denying several little things he wanted! 
He stood like Adam lingering near his garden,
 With useless penitence perplexed and haunted,
 Beseeching she no further would refuse –
 When lo! he stumbled o’er a pair of shoes. 

CLXXXI.

A pair of shoes – what then? Not much, if they
 Are such as fit with lady’s feet – but these
 (No one can tell how much I grieve to say)
 Were masculine! To see them, and to seize,
 Was but a moment’s act! Ah, well-a-day –
 My teeth begin to chatter, my veins freeze –
 Alfonso first examined well their fashion,
 And then flew out into another passion. 

CLXXXII.

He left the room for his relinquished sword,
 And Julia instant to the closet flew. 
‘Fly, Juan, fly! for Heaven’s sake! Not a word –
 The door is open – you may yet slip through
 The passage you so often have explored –
 Here is the garden-key! Fly – fly – Adieu! 
Haste – haste! – I hear Alfonso’s hurrying feet! 
Day has not broke – there’s no one in the street.’ 

CLXXXIII.

None can say that this was not good advice,
 The only mischief was, it came too late
 (Of all experience ’tis the usual price,
 A sort of income-tax laid on by fate) –
 Juan had reached the room-door in a trice,
 And might have done so by the garden-gate,
 But met Alfonso in his dressing-gown,
 Who threatened death – so Juan knocked him down. 

CLXXXIV.

Dire was the scuffle, and out went the light,
 Antonia cried out ‘Rape!’ and Julia ‘Fire!’ 
But not a servant stirred to aid the fight. 
Alfonso, pummelled to his heart’s desire,
 Swore lustily he’d be revenged this night –
 And Juan, too, blasphemed an octave higher! 
His blood was up – though young, he was a tartar,
 And not at all disposed to prove a martyr! 

CLXXXV.

Alfonso’s sword had dropped ere he could draw it,
 And they continued battling hand to hand,
 For Juan very luckily ne’er saw it! 
His temper not being under great command,
 If at that moment he had chanced to claw it,
 Alfonso’s days had not been in the land
 Much longer. Think of husbands’, lovers’, lives! 
And how ye may be doubly widows – wives! 

CLXXXVI.

Alfonso grappled to detain the foe,
 And Juan throttled him to get away,
 And blood (’twas from the nose) began to flow;
 At last, as they more faintly wrestling lay,
 Juan contrived to give an awkward blow,
 And then his only garment quite gave way –
 He fled, like Joseph, leaving it! but there,
 I doubt, all likeness ends between the pair. 

CLXXXVII.

Lights came at length, and men, and maids, who found
 An awkward spectacle their eyes before:
 Antonia in hysterics, Julia swooned,
 Alfonso leaning, breathless, by the door;
 Some half-torn drapery scattered on the ground,
 Some blood, and several footsteps, but no more –
 Juan the gate gained, turned the key about,
 And liking not the inside, locked the out! 
