The Gods of Greece

Fullblooming moon! In your light
Like liquid gold sparkles the sea;
Light like the day’s, but in milky enchantment,
Lies over the wide expanse of the strand,
And on the light-blue starless sky
Float the white clouds
Like colossal figures of gods
In shimmering marble.

No, nevermore, these are not clouds,
They are the real, the gods of Hellas,
Who once so joyfully ruled the world,
But now, thrust out and dead,
Pass as gigantic phantoms along
Over the skies at midnight.

Amazed and strangely blinded I behold
The airy pantheon,
The solemnly silent, appallingly moving
Forms of the giants.
There is Kronion, the king of heaven.
Snowwhite are the locks of his head,
Those famous Olympus-shaking locks.
He holds in his hand the extinguished bolt.
On his countenance lie misfortune and grief,
And yet, as of old, the ancient pride.
Those were happier times, oh Zeus,
When you took a heavenly pleasure
In boys and nymphs and hekatombs;
But even the gods do not rule forever,
The young dislodge the old
As once yourself dislodged your aged father
And your uncles, the Titans,
Jupiter Parricidal
You too I discern, proud Juno!
In spite of all your jealous fear
Another woman usurped the scepter
And you are no longer the queen of heaven.
And your large eye froze to a stare
And your lily-arms are enfeebled
And nevermore will your vengefulness strike
The God-visited Virgin
And the miracle-working Son of the Lord.
You too I discern, Pallas Athena!
With shield and wisdom could not even you
Ward off the doom of the gods?
You too I discern, you too, Aphrodite,
Once the golden! Now paled to silver!
Adorned you are still with the charm-lending girdle,
And in secret I dread the sight of your beauty,
And if your generous body would grant me its favors,
As to other heroes, I should die of terror.
A charnel goddess to me you appear,
Venus Libitina!
No longer in love glances at you
Yonder the dreadful Ares.

So sad are the eyes of Phoebus Apollo,
The youthful. His lyre is silent,
Which once so joyfully sang at the feast of the gods.
Still sadder the look of Hephàistos,
And truly, the limpfoot, no longer
Does he assume the service of Hebe
To pour around the assembly
The delicious nectar. — And long is extinguished
The inextinguishable Olympian laughter.

I have never loved you, you gods!
For repulsive to me are the Greeks
And still more hateful to me are the Romans.
But holy compassion and shuddering pity
Stream through my heart
When I behold you yonder,
Forsaken gods,
Dead, somnambulous shadows,
Weak as the mist dispelled by a wind
And when I consider how cowardly windy
The gods are by whom you were vanquished,
The new, ruling, pitiful gods,
Malicious, in sheepskins of self-abasement,
Oh, then I am seized by a sullen rancor
And I long to break the newer temples
And battle for you, you ancient gods,
For you and your valid ambrosian rights,
And before your lofty altars,
Re-erected, steaming with offerings,
Would I kneel and pray myself
And lift up my arms beseeching —

For, after all, though you ancient gods
When men were fighting in days of old,
Were ever on the side of the victors,
Man, in truth, is more generous than you,
And in the conflict of gods I now hold
To the side of the gods who are vanquished.

Thus I spoke; visibly flushed
Up yonder the pallid cloud-born shapes
And gazed, as if dying, upon me,
Transfigured by pain, and suddenly vanished.

Just then the moon went into hiding
Behind the clouds which darkly approached;
High up surged the sea
And triumphant emerged in the sky
The stars eternal.
