Beniowski

Poem. [Canto I, 25 – 27; Canto II, 12 – 20]

CANTO I

25.

O melancholy! Nymph! Whence comest thou? 
Art thou a creeping plague, an epidemic? 
From where didst thou originate, and how? 
Both aristos and poets academic
 Are touched by thee! – Ah, Nymph! I must avow
 That I too caught the malady systemic,
 And am by now (the devil! – I’m no ironist)
 No longer Polish – but a Byronist ... 

26.

‘Tis partly guilt at my hot adolescence,
 In part the fault of our massed Polish dead,
 In part my life of pain (no convalescence),
 In part the fiery ghosts which walk in dread,
 Exhibiting their dirty deliquescence,
 Which will at Judgement Day all spring new-spread,
 And walk, with creaks and tears, a horrid horde,
 Till their poor Polish dust torments the Lord. 

27.

What pretty lines! With them I shall begin
 A great new work yclept ‘The Final Day’,
 And as the Furies’ fires and whips for sin,
 (For every newborn sin is fresh as May,
 Though gentle May’s much kinder on your skin
 Than is hot Hell, that fearful, frazzling fray ... 
But I shall start this work some later date,
 Because my mentors can no longer wait). 

CANTO II

12.

Oh God! What romances I should create,
 If I would be the sport of bookish fools –
 Our fat Sanchos, who play and recreate,
 And practice hard with all their critics’ tools,
 And read by syllables. To procreate
 With prose is base, and, lulled by poetry’s rules,
 I fall among the flowers and herbs of rhyme,
 Caressed by octaves, and the sestet’s chime. 

13.

If words, some wit would have us understand,
 Could change to individuals through dark art,1
 And if our language were the fatherland,
 Then, formed from words, my bust would stand apart,
 With this inscribed: ‘Patri patriae. ’ – Such grand
 New criticism! – Halt! – from my bust sparks dart,
 As it smiles down, well pleased at such gay Babel,
 Like nightingales, or mosaics in the fable;

14.

Surround it with green cypresses and larches,
 And like Aeolus’ harp ’twill hum, and hymn,
 Tree2 dryad-like into red roses’ arches,
 Voice to the fields via the forest dim,
 And make all earth swing round in swan-like marches –
 Like nightingale-infested poplars slim,
 Which, when they start their wingéd song at night,
 You’ll think that with your cottage you’re in flight,

15.

Transported by the voice, or the bright moon,
 The full-blown heart, deep-pounding without fade;
 Oh! If words to a statue could so soon
 Combine, and stand below the cypress’ shade,
 As marble hard conceals soul in its tune,
 And slowly sings soul like a golden blade,
 And pours out sad and slow its gentle runs,
 That in a thousand years, like eastern suns

16.

It stands a whole, enormous ... If, alas! ... 
My wants are like the cravings of that Klepht3
 Whose windowed hearse would let the sunlight pass,
 And for the swallows ... what? I twitch, bereft,
 Like Telimen,4 the mushroom-lusting lass,
 Who swatted ants instead (an image deft) –
 I’m not just speaking in the wind, but hope,
 Like him from Poznań,5 I’m a sage – no dope. 

17.

Will critics, wallowing happily as ever,
 Make new discoveries in this sweet confection? 
I don’t know. – At first it seems a safe endeavour,
 Fast-drifting through my dizzy dreams’ perfection,
 But later, printing it, my rainbows sever
 From their first shapes. – So now my life’s reflection
 Falls in these verses, none too finely spoken;
 How merrily the heart beats – when it’s broken! 

18.

It’s lucky the young hero of this canto
 Is fresh, in love, and has a darkling eye,
 Gold with the sheen of greenish sea’s portmanteau,
 But not a very quick, or worldly spy:
 He’s far too calm and dim to be the man to
 See the indifferent planet pass him by. 
Ah! Many times you’ll sigh all pessimistic,
 To see how much his mind is inartistic! 

19.

Though poetry engulfs him – Sweet-faced reader! 
If you were in his place, how many times
 You’d change into an exclamations-breeder,
 Which, like a hyppogriff,6 cuts through the rhymes,
 And swears, how cold the heart’s about its leader! 
Skeletons, white amphibians in their slimes! 7 –
 Beniowski, as if God had warned him clear,
 A priori felt ’em – but didn’t see ’em near. 

20.

He neither wrote nor even spoke a thing –
 Poor little thing! He lacked a ready form! 
The bell of his pure thoughts would never swing,
 There were no new thoughts in his brain to swarm;
 But only such as out of rose-lips spring;
 And look! amidst the lime-tree beehives warm,
 He kneels by her, as if a dog would pray –
 Though both are bound upon on a fearful way. 
