Mary the Maid of the Inn

Who is she, the poor maniac, whose wildly-fixed eyes
 Seem a heart overcharged to express? 
She weeps not, yet often and deeply she sighs;
 She never complains, but her silence implies
 The composure of settled distress. 

No aid, no compassion, the maniac will seek –
 Cold and hunger awake not her care. 
Through her rags do the winds of the winter blow bleak
 On her poor withered bosom, half bare, and her cheek
 Hath the deathy pale hue of despair. 

Yet cheerful and happy – nor distant the day –
 Poor Mary the Maniac has been:
 The traveller remembers, who journeyed this way,
 No damsel so lovely, no damsel so gay,
 As Mary the Maid of the Inn! 

Her cheerful address filled the guests with delight
 As she welcomed them in with a smile;
 Her heart was a stranger to childish affright,
 And Mary would walk by the Abbey at night
 When the wind whistled down the dark aisle. 

She loved – and young Richard had settled the day,
 And she hoped to be happy for life –
 But Richard was idle, and worthless, and they
 Who knew him would pity poor Mary, and say
 That she was too good for his wife. 

’Twas in autumn, and stormy and dark was the night,
 And fast were the windows and door;
 Two guests sat enjoying the fire that burnt bright,
 And, smoking in silence with tranquil delight,
 They listened to hear the wind roar. 

‘’Tis pleasant’, cried one, ‘seated by the fireside,
 To hear the wind whistle without.’ 
‘A fine night for the Abbey!’ his comrade replied,
 ‘Methinks a man’s courage would now be well tried
 Who should wander the ruins about. 

I myself, like a schoolboy, should tremble to hear
 The hoarse ivy shake over my head,
 And could fancy I saw, half persuaded by fear,
 Some ugly old Abbot’s white spirit appear –
 For this wind might awaken the dead!’ 

‘I’ll wager a dinner’, the other one cried,
 ‘That Mary would venture there now!’ 
‘Then wager, and lose!’ with a sneer he replied,
 ‘I’ll warrant she’d fancy a ghost by her side,
 And faint if she saw a white cow!’ 

‘Will Mary this charge on her courage allow?’ 
His companion exclaimed with a smile –
 ‘I shall win, for I know she will venture there now,
 And earn a new bonnet by bringing a bough
 From the elder that grows in the aisle.’ 

With fearless good humour did Mary comply,
 And her way to the Abbey she bent;
 The night was dark, and the wind was high,
 And as hollowly howling it swept through the sky
 She shivered with cold as she went,

O’er the path so well-known still proceeded the Maid
 Where the Abbey rose dim on the sight;
 Through the gateway she entered – she felt not afraid,
 Yet the ruins were lonely and wild, and their shade
 Seemed to deepen the gloom of the night. 

All around her was silent, save when the rude blast
 Howled dismally round the old pile;
 Over weed-covered fragments still fearless she passed,
 And arrived in the innermost ruin at last
 Where the elder-tree grew in the aisle. 

Well pleased did she reach it, and quickly drew near,
 And hastily gathered the bough –
 When the sound of a voice seemed to rise on her ear;
 She paused, and she listened, all eager to hear,
 And her heart panted painfully now. 

The wind blew, the hoarse ivy shook over her head;
 She listened – nought else could she hear! 
The wind ceased – her heart sunk in her bosom with dread,
 For she heard in the ruins distinctly the tread
 Of footsteps approaching her near. 

Behind a wide column, half breathless with fear
 She crept to conceal herself there;
 That instant the moon o’er a dark cloud shone clear,
 And she saw in the moonlight two ruffians appear,
 And between them a corpse did they bear. 

Then Mary could feel her heart-blood curdle cold;
 Again the rough wind hurried by:
 It blew off the hat of the one – and behold
 Even close to the feet of poor Mary it rolled! 
She felt, and expected to die. 

‘Curse the hat!’ he exclaims. ‘Nay, come on and first hide
 The dead body’, his comrade replies. 
She beheld them in safety pass on by her side,
 She seizes the hat – fear her courage supplied –
 And fast through the Abbey she flies. 

She ran with wild speed, she rushed in at the door,
 She gazed horribly eager around;
 Then her limbs could support their faint burden no more,
 And exhausted and breathless she sunk on the floor,
 Unable to utter a sound. 

Ere yet her pale lips could the story impart,
 For a moment the hat met her view;
 Her eyes from that object convulsively start,
 For – oh God – what cold horror then thrilled through her heart
 When the name of her Richard she knew! 

Where the old Abbey stands, on the common hard by,
 His gibbet is now to be seen –
 Not far from the road it engages the eye –
 The traveller beholds it, and thinks with a sigh
 Of poor Mary, the Maid of the Inn. 
