The Indian Bride

She has lighted her lamp, and crowned it with flowers,
 The sweetest that breathed of the summer hours,
 Red and white roses linked in a band
 Like a maiden’s blush, or a maiden’s hand;
 Jasmines – some like silver spray,
 Some like gold in the morning ray –
 Fragrant stars, and favourites they,
 When Indian girls on a festival-day
 Braid their dark tresses, and all over weaves
 The rosy-bower of lotus leaves –
 Canopy suiting the lamp-lighted bark,
 Love’s own flowers, and Love’s own ark. 

She watched the sky, the sunset grew dim;
 She raised to Camdeo her evening hymn. 
The scent of the night-flowers came on the air;
 And then, like a bird escaped from the snare,
 She flew to the river (no moon was bright,
 But the stars and the fire-flies gave her their light);
 She stood beneath the mangos’ shade,
 Half delighted and half afraid;
 She trimmed her lamp, and breathed on each bloom
 (Oh, that breath was sweeter than all their perfume!) 
Threw spices and oil on the spire of flame,
 Called thrice on her absent lover’s name –
 And every pulse throbbed as she gave
 Her little boat to the Ganges’ wave. 

There are a thousand fanciful things
 Linked round the young heart's imaginings. 
In its first love-dream, a leaf or a flower
 Is gifted then with a spell and a power:
 A shade is an omen, a dream is a sign,
 From which the maiden can well divine
 Passion's whole history. Those only can tell
 Who have loved as young hearts can love so well,
 How the pulses will beat, and the cheek will be dyed,
 When they have some love-augury tried. 
Oh, it is not for those whose feelings are cold,
 Withered by care, or blunted by gold;
 Whose brows have darkened with many years,
 To feel again youth's hopes and fears —
 What they now might blush to confess,
 Yet what made their spring-day's happiness! 

Zaide watched her flower-built vessel glide,
 Mirrored beneath on the deep-blue tide;
 Lovely and lonely, scented and bright,
 Like Hope’s own bark, all bloom and light. 
There’s not one breath of wind on the air,
 The heavens are cloudless, the waters are fair,
 No dew is falling, yet woe to that shade –
 The maiden is weeping, her lamp has decayed! 

Hark to the ring of the scimitar –
 It tells that the soldier returns from afar. 
Down from the mountains the warriors come:
 Hark to the thunder-roll of the drum! 
To the startling voice of the trumpet’s call! 
To the cymbal’s clash – to the atabal! 
The banners of crimson float in the sun;
 The warfare is ended, the battle is won. 
The mother hath taken the child from her breast
 And raised it to look on its father’s crest. 
The pathway is lined, as the bands pass along,
 With maidens, who meet them with flowers and song. 
And Zaide hath forgotten in Azim’s arms
 All her so false lamp’s falser alarms. 

This looks not a bridal – the singers are mute,
 Still is the mandore, and breathless the lute;
 Yet there the bride sits. Her dark hair is bound,
 And the robe of her marriage floats white on the ground. 
Oh, where is her lover, the bridegroom – oh, where? 
Look under yon black pall – the bridegroom is there! 
Yet the guests are all bidden, the feast is the same,
 The bride plights her troth amid smoke and mid flame! 
They have raised the death-pyre of sweet scented wood,
 And sprinkled it o’er with the sacred flood
 Of the Ganges. The priests are assembled – their song
 Sinks deep on the ear as they bear her along,
 The bride of the dead. Aye, is this not love –
 That one pure, wild feeling all others above,
 Vowed to the living, and kept to the tomb –
 The same in its blight as it was in its bloom! 
With no tear in her eye, and no change in her smile,
 Young Zaide had come nigh to the funeral pile. 
The bells of the dancing ceased from their sound;
 Silent they stood by that holiest mound. 
From a crowd like the sea-waves there came not a breath,
 When the maiden stood by the place of death! 
One moment was given, the last she might spare,
 To the mother who stood in her weeping there. 
She took the jewels that shone on her hand;
 She took from her dark hair its flowery band,
 And scattered them round. At once they raise
 The hymn of rejoicing and love in her praise. 
A prayer is muttered, a blessing said,
 Her torch is raised – she is by the dead. 
She has fired the pile! At once there came
 A mingled rush of smoke and flame,
 Though the wind swept it off. They saw the bride –
 Laid by her Azim, side by side. 
The breeze had spread the long curls of her hair:
 Like a banner of fire they played on the air. 
The smoke and the flame gathered round as before,
 Then cleared – but the bride was seen no more! 
