The Prelude

[Book X. ‘Residence in France and French Revolution’, ll. 466-476, 515-556 (‘Eternal Justice’: Morecambe Sands, Aug. 1794)]

Oh Friend, few happier moments have been mine
 Through my whole life than that when first I heard
 That this foul tribe of Moloch was o’erthrown
 And their chief regent levelled with the dust! 
The day was one which haply may deserve
 A separate chronicle. Having gone abroad
 From a small village where I tarried then,
 To the same far-secluded privacy
 I was returning. Over the smooth sands
 Of Levens’ ample estuary lay
 My journey, and beneath a genial sun. 
Without me and within as I advanced
 All that I saw, or felt, or communed with,
 Was gentleness and peace. Upon a small
 And rocky island near, a fragment stood –
 Itself like a sea-rock – of what had been
 A Romish chapel, where in ancient times
 Masses were said at the hour which suited those
 Who crossed the sands with ebb of morning tide. 
Not far from this still ruin all the plain
 Was spotted with a variegated crowd
 Of coaches, wains, and travellers (horse, and foot),
 Wading beneath the conduct of their guide
 In loose procession through the shallow stream
 Of inland-water – the great sea meanwhile
 Was at safe distance, far retired. I paused
 Unwilling to proceed, the scene appeared
 So gay and cheerful – when, a traveller
 Chancing to pass, I carelessly enquired
 If any news were stirring. He replied
 (In the familiar language of the day)
 That Robespierre was dead. Nor was a doubt,
 On further question, left within my mind,
 But that the tidings were substantial truth –
 That he and his supporters all were fallen. 
Great was my glee of spirit, great my joy
 In vengeance, and eternal justice, thus
 Made manifest. ‘Come now, ye golden times’,
 Said I, forth-breathing on those open sands
 A hymn of triumph, ‘as the morning comes
 Out of the bosom of the night, come ye! 
Thus far our trust is verified: behold,
 They who with clumsy desperation brought
 Rivers of blood, and preached that nothing else
 Could cleanse the Augean stable, by the might
 Of their own helper have been swept away! 
Their madness is declared and visible –
 Elsewhere will safety now be sought, and earth
 March firmly towards righteousness and peace.’ 
Then schemes I framed more calmly when and how
 The madding factions might be tranquillized,
 And (through hardships manifold and long)
 The mighty renovation would proceed. 
