This Leaning Tree with Ivy Overhung

This leaning tree with ivy overhung,
 This crooked brook o’er which is rudely flung
 A slender plank that bends beneath the feet,
 And that small hill the shepherd’s summer seat,
 Make up a picture to the mind and wear
 A nobler gild than palace-walls can heir. 
To me the wild wind dashes o’er the scene
 Enchantment’s shades of vivifying green:
 I see her, sketchy pencil in her hand,
 Painting the moving scene to fairy land! 
That blackbird’s music from the hazel bower
 Turns into golden drops this summer shower –
 To think the rain that wets his sooty wing
 Should wake the gushes of his soul to sing! 
Hark at the melody, how rich and loud
 (Like daylight breaking through the morning cloud),
 How luscious through that sea of green it floats! 
Knowst thou of music breathed from sweeter notes
 Than that wild minstrel of the summer shower
 Breathes at this moment from that hazel-bower? 
To me the anthem of a thousand tongues
 Were poor and idle to the simple songs
 Of that high-toned and edifying bird
 That sings to Nature, by itself, unheard. 

There is a language wrote on earth and sky
 By God’s own pen in silent majesty;
 There is a voice that’s heard and felt and seen
 In spring’s young shades and summer’s endless green;
 There is a book of poesy and spells
 In which that voice in sunny splendour dwells;
 There is a page in which that voice aloud
 Speaks music to the few, and not the crowd! 
Though no romantic scenes my feet hath trod,
 The voice of Nature, as the voice of God,
 Appeals to me in every tree and flower,
 Breathing his glory, magnitude and power. 
In Nature’s open book I read, and see
 Beauty’s rich lesson in this seeming pea. 
Crowds see no magic in this trifling thing –
 Pshaw, ’tis a weed, and millions come with spring!’ 
I hear rich music whereso’er I look,
 But heedless worldlings chide the brawling brook. 
And that small lark between me and the sky
 Breathes sweetest strains of morning’s melody –
 Yet by the heedless crowd ’tis only heard
 As the small warbling of a common bird
 That o’er the plough-teams hails the morning-sun. 
They see no music from such magic won;
 Yet I see melody in Nature’s laws –
 Or do I dream? Still wonder bids me pause. 

I pause and hear a voice that speaks aloud:
 ‘’Tis not on earth, nor in the thunder-cloud! 
The many look for sound, ’tis silence speaks –
 And song, like sunshine, from her rapture breaks.’ 
I hear it in my bosom, ever near,
 ’Tis in these winds, and they are everywhere –
 It casts around my vision magic spells,
 And makes earth Heaven, where poor fancy dwells! 
I read its speech, and its speech is joy! 
So, without teaching, when a lonely boy,
 Each weed to me did happy tidings bring
 (Plain as the daisy wrote the name of spring),
 And God’s own language, unto Nature given,
 Seemed universal as the light of Heaven
 And common as the grass upon the plain
 That all may read and meet with joy again –
 Save the unheeding heart, who, like the tomb,
 Shuts joy in darkness, and forbids its bloom. 
