Alastor

[Preface (1st paragraph) and ll. 140-222]

The Poet wandering on, through Araby
 And Persia, and the wild Carmanian waste,
 And o’er the aerial mountains which pour down
 Indus and Oxus from their icy caves,
 In joy and exultation held his way,
 Till in the vale of Cashmire, far within
 Its loneliest dell, where odorous plants entwine
 Beneath the hollow rocks a natural bower,
 Beside a sparkling rivulet he stretched
 His languid limbs. 
A vision on his sleep
 There came – a dream of hopes that never yet
 Had flushed his cheek. He dreamed a veiled maid
 Sat near him, talking in low tones. 
Her voice was like the voice of his own soul
 Heard in the calm of thought: its music long,
 Like woven sounds of streams and breezes, held
 His inmost sense suspended in its web
 Of many-coloured woof and shifting hues. 
Knowledge and truth and virtue were her theme,
 And lofty hopes of divine liberty
 The thoughts most dear to him), and poesy –
 Herself a poet. Soon the solemn mood
 Of her pure mind kindled through all her frame
 A permeating fire: wild numbers then
 She raised, with voice stifled in tremulous sobs
 Subdued by its own pathos. Her fair hands
 Were bare alone, sweeping from strange harp
 Strange symphony, and in their branching veins
 The eloquent blood told an ineffable tale. 
The beating of her heart was heard to fill
 The pauses of her music, and her breath
 Tumultuously accorded with those fits
 Of intermitted song. 
Sudden she rose,
 As if her heart impatiently endured
 Its bursting burden. At the sound he turned,
 And saw by the warm light of their own life
 Her glowing limbs beneath the sinuous veil
 Of woven wind, her outspread arms now bare,
 Her dark locks floating in the breath of night,
 Her beamy bending eyes, her parted lips
 Outstretched and pale, and quivering eagerly. 
His strong heart sank and sickened with excess
 Of love. He reared his shuddering limbs and quelled
 His gasping breath, and spread his arms to meet
 Her panting bosom. She drew back a while,
 Then, yielding to the irresistible joy,
 With frantic gesture and short breathless cry
 Folded his frame in her dissolving arms. 
Now blackness veiled his dizzy eyes, and night
 Involved and swallowed up the vision; sleep,
 Like a dark flood suspended in its course,
 Rolled back its impulse on his vacant brain. 

Roused by the shock, he started from his trance –
 The cold white light of morning, the blue moon
 Low in the west, the clear and garish hills,
 The distinct valley and the vacant woods,
 Spread round him where he stood. Whither have fled
 The hues of heaven that canopied his bower
 Of yesternight, the sounds that soothed his sleep,
 The mystery and the majesty of Earth,
 The joy and exultation? His wan eyes
 Gaze on the empty scene as vacantly
 As Ocean’s moon looks on the moon in heaven. 
The spirit of sweet human love has sent
 A vision to the sleep of him who spurned
 Her choicest gifts. 
He eagerly pursues
 Beyond the realms of dream that fleeting shade –
 He overleaps the bounds! Alas, alas,
 Were limbs, and breath, and being, intertwined
 Thus treacherously? Lost, lost, for ever lost,
 In the wide pathless desert of deep sleep,
 That beautiful shape! Does the dark gate of Death
 Conduct to thy mysterious paradise,
 Oh Sleep? Does the bright arch of rainbow clouds,
 And pendent mountains seen in the calm lake,
 Lead only to a black and watery depth,
 While Death’s blue vault, with loathliest vapours hung
 (Where every shade which the foul grave exhales
 Hides its dead eye from the detested day),
 Conduct, oh Sleep, to thy delightful realms? 
This doubt, with sudden tide, flowed on his heart;
 The insatiate hope which it awakened stung
 His brain even like despair. 
