The Beautiful Halewa

Prudent Almansur, glorious emir, ruled the Cordoban empire; Hisham, his king, in the pleasant harem slept the soft dreams of pleasure. In the fountains, swans of the purest gold, worked on shells of porphyry in the midst of richly planted gardens, spilled out transparent water. The limpid baths of marble basins, where the pure water takes a thousand essences are enclosed in irises and clumps of lilacs of beautiful tints and profuse scents. Damascenes and carpets from Tunis adorned the rooms of the palace, pearls in goldthreaded tapestries, pearls on embroidered cushions. The perfumes of Arabia breathed out from beds of soft down in the side chambers and the silver fountains reflected the tall minarets of the royal palace. The renowned goddess of the royal temple, Halewa, was, in her good fortune, the idol of the monarch for her beauty, tender as a tear in a cradle. If she was the joy of a slave who knew how to enamour her with a loving troubador’s song, she learned more harmony than love at the sound of his sweet and sonorous harp. The skilled young man came tuning the sighs of love in varied tones. The beautiful favourite, sighing, made the first slight to the royal throne. One day ... Never had the sun thrust down his active ray with more heat nor was the flowerbed and the shade of the olive tree more beautiful to enjoy the heavenly repose. Thirsty for flattery and endearments, Hisham sought sighing encounters and, like the games of an innocent child, he yearned for tender embraces. Unhappy man, alas!, take heed of that rose which the gnawing insect has deflowered. Move not, no, the unreliable plant: the tomb of pain is at your side. He saw, sleeping in the grotto which, at the end of the walkway was covered with a climbing ivy, with fresh-plucked roses on her brow, the inconstant beauty whose breast he adored. He saw the slave sleeping ... Fresh flowers crowned his brow ... His impure lip murmured his love in his dreams, and the slip of the other lip perjured him. The harp forgotten on the grass moved its strings in the wind and seemed to weep the agony of its enamoured and accomplished owner. The lion roars and the serpent hisses through offended love, the woman weeps and the man washes, with his sinful blood which dishonours him, the heavy slab. Hisham groans; an infernal fury rends his heart; he places his hand on the hilt of his curved scimitar and the unhappy Halewa opens her eyes. She opens them to see the wild blow against the slave who loved her beauty, the livid corpse at her side and, rent from its shoulders, the head. She saw blood on her garments and on her veil, and the grotto and path were tinted with blood as the head rolled along the floor in a cold tremor and a horrible convulsion. She is dragged off to a gloomy dungeon by six black slaves ... Ah! her tears of pure jewels and timid gaze cannot bend the disdainful Moor. The new light of the clouded day glimpsed, on the point of a pole in the gardens, the horrid cold head of the slave and the jasmines spattered with blood.

