The Cenci

[Act V, scenes iii – iv]

Scene iii.

Bernardo

How gently slumber rests upon her face,
 Like the last thoughts of some day sweetly spent
 Closing in night and dreams, and so prolonged. 
After such torments as she bore last night,
 How light and soft her breathing comes. Aye me,
 Methinks that I shall never sleep again. 
But I must shake the heavenly dew of rest
 From this sweet folded flower, thus – wake! awake! 
What, sister, canst thou sleep? 

Beatrice

I was just dreaming
 That we were all in Paradise. Thou knowest
 This cell seems like a kind of Paradise
 After our father’s presence. 

Bernardo

Dear, dear sister,
 Would that thy dream were not a dream! Oh God!
 How shall I tell? 

Beatrice

What wouldst thou tell, sweet brother? 

Bernardo

Look not so calm and happy, or even whilst
 I stand considering what I have to say
 My heart will break. 

Beatrice

See now, thou makest me weep! 
How very friendless thou wouldst be, dear child,
 If I were dead. Say what thou hast to say. 

Bernardo

They have confessed; they could endure no more
 The tortures ... 

Beatrice

Ha! What was there to confess? 
They must have told some weak and wicked lie
 To flatter their tormentors. Have they said
 That they were guilty? Oh white innocence,
 That thou shouldst wear the mask of guilt to hide
 Thine awful and serenest countenance
 From those who know thee not! 
Ignoble hearts! 
For some brief spasms of pain, which are at least
 As mortal as the limbs through which they pass,
 Are centuries of high splendour laid in dust? 
And that eternal honour which should live
 Sunlike, above the reek of mortal fame,
 Changed to a mockery and a byword? What!
 Will you give up these bodies to be dragged
 At horses’ heels, so that our hair should sweep
 The footsteps of the vain and senseless crowd,
 Who (that they may make our calamity
 Their worship and their spectacle) will leave
 The churches and the theatres as void
 As their own hearts? Shall the light multitude
 Fling, at their choice, curses or faded pity,
 Sad funeral flowers to deck a living corpse,
 Upon us as we pass to pass away,
 And leave – what memory of our having been? 
Infamy, blood, terror, despair? Oh thou,
 Who wert a mother to the parentless,
 Kill not thy child! Let not her wrongs kill thee! 
Brother, lie down with me upon the rack,
 And let us each be silent as a corpse –
 It soon will be as soft as any grave. 
’Tis but the falsehood it can wring from fear
 Makes the rack cruel. 

Giacomo

They will tear the truth
 Even from thee at last, those cruel pains –
 For pity’s sake say thou art guilty now. 

Lucretia

Oh, speak the truth! Let us all quickly die –
 And after death, God is our judge, not they! 
He will have mercy on us. 

Bernardo

If indeed
 It can be true, say so, dear sister mine,
 And then the Pope will surely pardon you,
 And all be well. 

Judge

Confess, or I will warp
 Your limbs with such keen tortures –

Beatrice

Tortures! Turn
 The rack henceforth into a spinning-wheel! 
Torture your dog, that he may tell when last
 He lapped the blood his master shed! Not me –
 My pangs are of the mind, and of the heart,
 And of the soul; aye, of the inmost soul,
 Which weeps within tears as of burning gall
 To see, in this ill world where none are true,
 My kindred false to their deserted selves. 
And with considering all the wretched life
 Which I have lived, and its now wretched end,
 And the small justice shown by Heaven and Earth
 To me or mine; and what a tyrant thou art,
 And what slaves these; and what a world we make,
 The oppressor and the oppressed – such pangs compel
 My answer. What is it thou wouldst with me? 

Judge

Art thou not guilty of thy father’s death? 

Beatrice

Or wilt thou rather tax high-judging God
 That He permitted such an act as that
 Which I have suffered, and which He beheld –
 Made it unutterable, and took from it
 All refuge, all revenge, all consequence,
 But that which thou hast called my father’s death? –
 Which is, or is not, what men call a crime;
 Which either I have done, or have not done! 
Say what ye will, I shall deny no more. 
If ye desire it thus, thus let it be,
 And so an end of all. Now do your will –
 No other pains shall force another word! 

Judge

She is convicted, but has not confessed. 
Be it enough. Until their final sentence
 Let none have converse with them. You, young Lord,
 Linger not here! 

Beatrice

Oh, tear him not away! 

Judge

Guards, do your duty. 

Bernardo

Oh! would ye divide
 Body from soul? 

Officer

That is the headsman’s business. 

Giacomo

Have I confessed? Is it all over now? 
No hope! No refuge! Oh weak, wicked tongue
 Which hast destroyed me, would that thou hadst been
 Cut out and thrown to dogs first! To have killed
 My father first, and then betrayed my sister –
 Aye, thee! the one thing innocent and pure
 In this black guilty world – to that which I
 So well deserve. My wife! My little ones! 
Destitute, helpless, and I – Father! God!
 Canst Thou forgive even the unforgiving,
 When their full hearts break thus, thus? 

Lucretia

Oh my child! 
To what a dreadful end are we all come! 
Why did I yield? Why did I not sustain
 Those torments? Oh, that I were all dissolved
 Into these fast and unavailing tears,
 Which flow and feel not! 

Beatrice

What ’twas weak to do,
 ’Tis weaker to lament, once being done. 
Take cheer! The God who knew my wrong, and made
 Our speedy act the angel of His wrath,
 Seems, and but seems, to have abandoned us. 
Let us not think that we shall die for this. 
Brother, sit near me; give me your firm hand –
 You had a manly heart. Bear up! Bear up! 
Oh dearest Lady, put your gentle head
 Upon my lap, and try to sleep awhile:
 Your eyes look pale, hollow and overworn,
 With heaviness of watching and slow grief. 
Come, I will sing you some low, sleepy tune,
 Not cheerful, nor yet sad – some dull old thing,
 Some outworn and unused monotony,
 Such as our country gossips sing and spin,
 Till they almost forget they live! Lie down –
 So, that will do. Have I forgot the words? 
Faith! They are sadder than I thought they were:

Song

False friend, wilt thou smile or weep
 When my life is laid asleep? 
Little cares for a smile or a tear,
 The clay-cold corpse upon the bier! 
Farewell! Heigho! 
What is this whispers low? 
There is a snake in thy smile, my dear,
 And bitter poison within thy tear. 

Sweet sleep, were death like to thee,
 Or if thou couldst mortal be,
 I would close these eyes of pain –
 When to wake? Never again. 
Oh world, farewell! 
Listen to the passing bell! 
It says, thou and I must part,
 With a light and a heavy heart. 

Scene iv.

Camillo

The Pope is stern, not to be moved or bent. 
He looked as calm and keen as is the engine
 Which tortures and which kills, exempt itself
 From aught that it inflicts – a marble form,
 A rite, a law, a custom, not a man! 
He frowned, as if to frown had been the trick
 Of his machinery, on the advocates
 Presenting the defenses, which he tore
 And threw behind, muttering with hoarse, harsh voice:
 Which among ye defended their old father
 Killed in his sleep?’ Then to another: ‘Thou
 Dost this in virtue of thy place. ’Tis well.’ 
He turned to me then, looking deprecation,
 And said these three words, coldly: ‘They must die.’ 

Bernardo

And yet you left him not? 

Camillo

I urged him still;
 Pleading, as I could guess, the devilish wrong
 Which prompted your unnatural parent’s death. 
And he replied: ‘Paolo Santa Croce
 Murdered his mother yester-evening,
 And he is fled. Parricide grows so rife
 That soon, for some just cause no doubt, the young
 Will strangle us all, dozing in our chairs. 
Authority, and power, and hoary hair
 Are grown crimes capital. You are my nephew,
 You come to ask their pardon – stay a moment –
 Here is their sentence! Never see me more
 Till, to the letter, it be all fulfilled.’ 

Bernardo

Oh God, not so! I did believe indeed
 That all you said was but sad preparation
 For happy news. Oh, there are words and looks
 To bend the sternest purpose! Once I knew them,
 Now I forget them at my dearest need. 
What think you if I seek him out, and bathe
 His feet and robe with hot and bitter tears,
 Importune him with prayers, vexing his brain
 With my perpetual cries, until in rage
 He strike me with his pastoral cross, and trample
 Upon my prostrate head, so that my blood
 May stain the senseless dust on which he treads,
 And remorse waken mercy? I will do it! 
Oh, wait till I return! 

Camillo

Alas, poor boy! 
A wreck-devoted seaman thus might pray
 To the deaf sea. 

Beatrice

I hardly dare to fear
 That thou bringst other news than a just pardon. 

Camillo

May God in heaven be less inexorable
 To the Pope’s prayers, than he has been to mine. 
Here is the sentence and the warrant. 

Beatrice

Oh,
 My God! Can it be possible I have
 To die so suddenly? So young to go
 Under the obscure, cold, rotting, wormy ground! 
To be nailed down into a narrow place;
 To see no more sweet sunshine; hear no more
 Blithe voice of living thing; muse not again
 Upon familiar thoughts, sad, yet thus lost. 
How fearful! – to be nothing! Or to be –
 What? Oh, where am I? Let me not go mad! 
Sweet Heaven, forgive weak thoughts! If there should be
 No God, no Heaven, no Earth, in the void world –
 The wide, gray, lampless, deep, unpeopled world! 
If all things then should be – my father’s spirit,
 His eye, his voice, his touch surrounding me,
 The atmosphere and breath of my dead life! 
If sometimes, as a shape more like himself,
 Even the form which tortured me on earth,
 Masked in gray hairs and wrinkles, he should come
 And wind me in his hellish arms, and fix
 His eyes on mine, and drag me down, down, down! 
For was he not alone omnipotent
 On earth, and ever-present? Even though dead,
 Does not his spirit live in all that breathe,
 And work for me and mine still the same ruin,
 Scorn, pain, despair? Whoever yet returned
 To teach the laws of Death’s untrodden realm –
 Unjust perhaps as those which drive us now,
 Oh, whither, whither? 

Lucretia

Trust in God’s sweet love,
 The tender promises of Christ! Ere night,
 Think, we shall be in Paradise. 

Beatrice

’Tis past! 
Whatever comes my heart shall sink no more. 
And yet, I know not why, your words strike chill. 
How tedious, false and cold seem all things! I
 Have met with much injustice in this world:
 No difference has been made by God or man,
 Or any power moulding my wretched lot,
 Twixt good or evil, as regarded me. 
I am cut off from the only world I know –
 From light, and life, and love, in youth’s sweet prime. 
You do well telling me to trust in God,
 I hope I do trust in Him. In whom else
 Can any trust? And yet my heart is cold. 

Giacomo

Know you not, Mother – Sister, know you not? 
Bernardo even now is gone to implore
 The Pope to grant our pardon. 

Lucretia

Child, perhaps
 It will be granted. We may all then live
 To make these woes a tale for distant years:
 Oh, what a thought! It gushes to my heart
 Like the warm blood. 

Beatrice

Yet both will soon be cold. 
Oh, trample out that thought! Worse than despair,
 Worse than the bitterness of death, is hope! 
It is the only ill which can find place
 Upon the giddy, sharp and narrow hour
 Tottering beneath us. Plead with the swift frost
 That it should spare the eldest flower of spring;
 Plead with awakening earthquake, o’er whose couch
 Even now a city stands, strong, fair, and free –
 Now stench and blackness yawn, like death! Oh, plead
 With famine, or wind-walking pestilence,
 Blind lightning, or the deaf sea, not with man –
 Cruel, cold, formal man; righteous in words,
 In deeds a Cain! No, Mother, we must die;
 Since such is the reward of innocent lives,
 Such the alleviation of worst wrongs. 
And whilst our murderers live, and hard, cold men,
 Smiling and slow, walk through a world of tears
 To death as to life’s sleep, ’twere just the grave
 Were some strange joy for us. Come, obscure Death,
 And wind me in thine all-embracing arms! 
Like a fond mother hide me in thy bosom,
 And rock me to the sleep from which none wake. 
Live ye, who live, subject to one another
 As we were once, who now –

Bernardo

Oh, horrible! 
That tears, that looks, that hope poured forth in prayer
 Even till the heart is vacant and despairs,
 Should all be vain! The ministers of death
 Are waiting round the doors. I thought I saw
 Blood on the face of one! What if ’twere fancy –
 Soon the heart’s blood of all I love on earth
 Will sprinkle him, and he will wipe it off
 As if ’twere only rain. Oh life! Oh world! 
Cover me! Let me be no more! To see
 That perfect mirror of pure innocence
 Wherein I gazed, and grew happy and good,
 Shivered to dust! To see thee, Beatrice,
 Who made all lovely thou didst look upon –
 Thee, light of life – dead, dark! While I say ‘Sister’,
 To hear I have no sister! And thou, Mother,
 Whose love was as a bond to all our loves –
 Dead! The sweet bond broken! 
They come! Let me
 Kiss those warm lips before their crimson leaves
 Are blighted, white, cold – say farewell before
 Death chokes that gentle voice! Oh, let me hear
 You speak! 

Beatrice

Farewell, my tender brother. Think
 Of our sad fate with gentleness, as now,
 And let mild, pitying thoughts lighten for thee
 Thy sorrow’s load. Err not in harsh despair,
 But tears and patience. One thing more, my child:
 For thine own sake be constant to the love
 Thou bearest us – and to the faith that I,
 Though wrapped in a strange cloud of crime and shame,
 Lived ever holy and unstained. And though
 Ill tongues shall wound me, and our common name
 Be as a mark stamped on thine innocent brow
 For men to point at as they pass, do thou
 Forbear, and never think a thought unkind
 Of those who perhaps love thee in their graves. 
So mayst thou die as I do, fear and pain
 Being subdued. Farewell! Farewell! Farewell! 

Bernardo

I cannot say, farewell! 

Camillo

Oh, Lady Beatrice! 

Beatrice

Give yourself no unnecessary pain,
 My dear Lord Cardinal. Here, Mother, tie
 My girdle for me, and bind up this hair
 In any simple knot – aye, that does well. 
And yours I see is coming down. How often
 Have we done this for one another; now
 We shall not do it any more. My Lord,
 We are quite ready. Well – ’tis very well. 
