What the Shadow-Mouth Said

[excerpts]

Flowers suffer under the scissor,
 And shut like closed eyelids;
 All the women are dyed with the blood of roses;
 The virgin at the ball, who dances, angel with fresh colors,
 And who carries in her hand a cluster of flowers,
 Smilingly breathes in a bouquet of death throes. 
Weep over the uglinesses and ignominies,
 Weep over the unclean spider, over the worm,
 Over the slug with the back that is damp like winter,
 Over the vile aphid which one sees hanging from the leaf,
 Over the hideous crab, over the horrible centipede,
 Over the frightening toad, poor gentle-eyed monster,
 Who always looks at the mysterious sky! 
Pity the bird of crime and the beast of prey. 
That which Domitian, Caesar, did with joy,
 Tiger, he continues it with horror. Verres,
 Who was a wolf under his purple, is a wolf in the forests;
 He descends, awakened, the other side of the dream:
 His laugh, in the depths of the forest, ends in a scream;
 Weep over that which screams and weep over Verres. 
Over these living tombs, marked with obscure decrees,
 Lean tenderly! pour out your prayer! 
Pity makes rays of light come out of the stone. 
Pity the wolf cub, pity the lion cub. 
Matter, horrible block, is nothing but the heavy heap
 Of monstrous effects, come out of dark causes. 
Have pity! see souls in things. 
Alas! the padded cell also has a lock. 
Pity the prisoner, but pity the bolt;
 Pity the chain in the depths of unhealthy penal colonies;
 The axe and the block are two lugubrious beings;
 The axe suffers as much as the body, the block
 Suffers as much as the head; O mysteries of on high! 
They fight a bitter and hideous battle;
 It nicks the axe and the axe notches it;
 They whisper to each other: Assassin! 
And the axe curses men, shadowed swarm,
 When, in the evenings, on the back of the executioner, its minister,
 It returns in the darkness, and glints, sinister mirror,
 Dripping with blood and reflecting the heavens;
 And, at night, in the dismal and silent stall,
 The red-necked corpse, frightening, icy, pallid,
 Alone, knows what the block said to him, itself a trunk. 
Oh! how cold the earth is and how hard the rocks are! 
What mute horror in the dim thickets! 
The night’s black tears on the white dove
 Fall; the wind strips and tortures the branch;
 What a horrible monologue in the green-branched tree! 
What a shudder in the grass! Oh! what wide-open, fixed eyes
 In the deep pebbles, souls’ oubliettes! 
It is a soul which the water saws in its cold blades;
 It is a soul which makes the wine-press drip. 
Darkness! the universe is haggard. Every evening,
 The black horizon climbs and the black night falls;
 Both, in the west, in a tomb’s movement,
 They go, approaching each other, and in the firmament,
 O terror! on the day, slowly crushed,
 The appalling shadow’s pliers close. 
Oh! cradles are frightening. A penal colony is in a seed. 
Have pity, all of you and whoever you are! 
Hideous punishments, one ground on top of the other,
 Roll, submerging everything, except memories. 
Sometimes one sees passing in these black depths,
 Something like a far-off ray of the eternal love;
 Then Atreus the hyena and Timur the jackal,
 And Caiaphas the thorn and Pilate the reed,
 Alaric the volcano with the scarlet muzzle,
 Henry VIII the bear, to whom More prayed in vain,
 Selim the boar and Borgia the pig,
 Cry out to the adorable Being; and the beasts
 Which in olden days wore miters on their heads,
 The grain-of-sand kings, the blade-of-grass emperors,
 All the hideous prides and all the furors,
 Break; gentleness seizes the wildest;
 The cat grooms the bird, the bird kisses the fly;
 The vulture says in shadow to the sparrow: Pardon! 
A caress comes out of the holly and the thistle;
 All the roars melt into prayers;
 The stones are heard to accuse themselves of their crimes;
 All these dark cells which are called flowers
 Quiver; the rock begins to dissolve into tears;
 Arms are raised out of the sleeping tomb;
 The wind groans, the night complains, the water laments,
 And, under the softened eye which looks on from above,
 The whole abyss is nothing now but an immense sob. 

Hope! hope! hope, wretches! 
No infinite mourning, no incurable ills,
 No eternal hell! 
Pains to go God, like the arrow to the target;
 Good deeds are the invisible hinges
 Of the gate of heaven. 

Mourning is virtue, remorse is the pole
 Of the garroted monsters whose cavern is the jail;
 When, before Jehovah,
 A living person remains pure in the fleshly shadows,
 Death, softened angel, brings its two wings
 To the man who is leaving. 

Hells remake themselves as Edens; that is their task. 
Every globe is a bird which evil holds and releases. 
Living people, I say to you,
 Virtues, among you, do the august labor
 Of increasing heaven on your brows; whoever is just
 Works in heaven. 

The hour approaches. Hope. Relight the extinguished soul! 
Love each other! love each other! for it is the holy warmth,
 It is the fire of the true day. 
The dark universe, cold, frozen, heavy, reclaims
 The sublimation of the being by the flame,
 Of men by love! 

Already, in the ocean of shadow which God looks over,
 The shadowed archipelago of the penal colony is illuminated;
 God is the great magnet;
 And the globes, opening their sinister eyes,
 Toward the immensities of the eternal dawn
 Turn slowly. 

Oh! how all the harmonies will sing,
 How, in the blessed spheres, will shine
 The faces of brightness,
 How the firmaments will melt in delirium,
 How they will shiver, all the great lyres
 Of serenity,

When, of the monster Matter opening all the greenhouses,
 Making all the miseries vanish into splendors,
 Changing absinthe into honey,
 Flooding with beauty the diminished night,
 Just as the sun pulls mist to itself
 And fills it with rainbows,

God, with his fixed gaze attracting the shadows,
 Seeing toward him, from the depths of funereal cloacae
 Where evil begged him,
 Climb the stammering enormity of praises,
 Will cause to return, among the archangel universes,
 The pariah universe! 

One will see the illuminated mires throb,
 And the most desperate uglinesses shine
 On the highest summit,
 The dazzling spider at the threshold of the blue pilasters
 Will glow, and, bearing ears of stars,
 The straw of the dungeon will straighten! 

Brightness will rise in everything like sap;
 One will see shining on the brow of the dreaming bull
 The celestial crescent;
 The charnel house will sing in the horror which encumbers it,
 And on all the dunghills will appear in the shadow
 A resplendent Job! 

O disappearance of the antique anathema! 
The depth saying to the height: I love you! 
O return of the banished! 
What dazzling wonder in the depth of the sublime heavens! 
What a surfeit of brightness is the shadow of the abyss
 Crying out: Be blessed! 

One will see the herd of formidable hydras
 Come out, rise from the depths of unsoundable mists
 And be transfigured;
 Stars budding in the black holes of their skulls,
 Just God! and by degrees becoming diaphanous,
 Monsters becoming azure! 

They will come, without being able either to speak or too answer,
 Distraught! one will see aureoles melt
 The horns of their brows;
 They will hold in their claws, in the middle of the calm heavens,
 Trembling rays like palm fronds;
 Muzzles will kiss! 

They will come! they will come, trembling, broken with ecstasy,
 Each of them overflowing with sobs like a vase,
 But nevertheless without dread;
 Arms will be held out to them from the high dwelling,
 And Jesus, bending over the weeping Belial,
 Will say to him: So, it’s you! 

And to God he will lead by the hand this brother! 
And, when they are near the steps of light,
 Perceived by us alone,
 Both will be so beautiful, that God whose eye flames,
 Will not be able to distinguish, this father dazzled with joy,
 Belial from Jesus! 

All will have been said. Evil will die; tears
 Will dry up; no more irons, no more mourning, no more alarms;
 The horrible unmerciful cavern
 Will cease to be deaf, and will stammer: What do I hear? 
Pains will end in all the shadow; an angel
 Will shout: Beginning! 
