Sleep and Poetry

[Ll. 96 – 162]

Oh for ten years, that I may overwhelm
 Myself in poesy – so I may do the deed
 That my own soul has to itself decreed. 
Then will I pass the countries that I see
 In long perspective, and continually
 Taste their pure fountains. First the realm I’ll pass
 Of Flora, and old Pan: sleep in the grass,
 Feed upon apples red and strawberries,
 And choose each pleasure that my fancy sees –
 Catch the white-handed nymphs in shady places
 To woo sweet kisses from averted faces,
 Play with their fingers, touch their shoulders white
 Into a pretty shrinking with a bite
 As hard as lips can make it, till, agreed,
 A lovely tale of human life we’ll read. 
And one will teach a tame dove how it best
 May fan the cool air gently o’er my rest;
 Another, bending o’er her nimble tread,
 Will set a green robe floating round her head,
 And still will dance with ever varied ease,
 Smiling upon the flowers and the trees;
 Another will entice me on, and on
 Through almond blossoms and rich cinnamon,
 Till in the bosom of a leafy world
 We rest in silence, like two gems upcurled
 In the recesses of a pearly shell. 
And can I ever bid these joys farewell? 
Yes, I must pass them for a nobler life,
 Where I may find the agonies, the strife
 Of human hearts – for lo, I see afar,
 O’ersailing the blue cragginess, a car
 And steeds with streamy manes. The charioteer
 Looks out upon the winds with glorious fear –
 And now the numerous tramplings quiver lightly
 Along a huge cloud’s ridge; and now, with sprightly
 Wheel, downward come they into fresher skies,
 Tipt round with silver from the sun’s bright eyes. 
Still downward with capacious whirl they glide,
 And now I see them on a green hillside
 In breezy rest among the nodding stalks. 
The charioteer with wondrous gesture talks
 To the trees and mountains, and there soon appear
 Shapes of delight, of mystery, and fear,
 Passing along before a dusky space
 Made by some mighty oaks. As they would chase
 Some ever-fleeting music, on they sweep! 
Lo, how they murmur, laugh, and smile, and weep –
 Some with upholden hand and mouth severe;
 Some with their faces muffled to the ear
 Between their arms; some, clear in youthful bloom,
 Go glad and smilingly athwart the gloom;
 Some looking back, and some with upward gaze. 
Yes, thousands in a thousand different ways
 Flit onward: now a lovely wreath of girls
 Dancing their sleek hair into tangled curls –
 And now broad wings! Most awfully intent
 The driver of those steeds is forward bent,
 And seems to listen – oh that I might know
 All that he writes with such a hurrying glow! 
The visions all are fled – the car is fled
 Into the light of Heaven – and in their stead
 A sense of real things comes doubly strong,
 And, like a muddy stream, would bear along
 My soul to nothingness! But I will strive
 Against all doubtings, and will keep alive
 The thought of that same chariot, and the strange
 Journey it went. 
