Procrastination

Love will expire – the gay, the happy dream
 Will turn to scorn, indifference, or esteem. 
Some favoured pairs, in this exchange, are blest,
 Nor sigh for raptures in a state of rest;
 Others, ill-matched, with minds unpaired, repent
 At once the deed, and know no more content –
 From joy to anguish they in haste decline,
 And, with their fondness, their esteem resign. 
More luckless still their fate, who are the prey
 Of long-protracted hope and dull delay:
 Mid plans of bliss the heavy hours pass on,
 Till love is withered, and till joy is gone. 
This gentle flame two youthful hearts possessed,
 The sweet disturber of unenvied rest:
 The prudent Dinah was the maid beloved,
 And the kind Rupert was the swain approved. 
A wealthy aunt her gentle niece sustained,
 He, with a father, at his desk remained –
 The youthful couple, to their vows sincere,
 Thus loved expectant, year succeeding year,
 With pleasant views and hopes, but not a prospect near. 
Rupert some comfort in his station saw,
 But the poor virgin lived in dread and awe;
 Upon her anxious looks the widow smiled,
 And bade her wait, ‘for she was yet a child’. 
She for her neighbour had a due respect,
 Nor would his son encourage or reject;
 And thus the pair, with expectations vain,
 Beheld the seasons change and change again. 
Meantime the nymph her tender tales perused,
 Where cruel aunts impatient girls refused –
 While hers, though teasing, boasted to be kind,
 And she, resenting, to be all resigned! 
The dame was sick, and when the youth applied
 For her consent, she groaned, and coughed, and cried,
 Talked of departing, and again her breath
 Drew hard, and coughed, and talked again of death:
 ‘Here you may live, my Dinah – here the boy
 And you together my estate enjoy!’ 
Thus to the lovers was her mind expressed,
 Till they forbore to urge the fond request. 
Servant, and nurse, and comforter, and friend,
 Dinah had still some duty to attend –
 But yet their walk, when Rupert’s evening call
 Obtained an hour, made sweet amends for all. 
So long they now each other’s thoughts had known,
 That nothing seemed exclusively their own;
 But with the common wish, the mutual fear,
 They now had travelled to their thirtieth year. 
At length a prospect opened – but alas! 
Long time must yet, before the union, pass:
 Rupert was called, in other clime, to increase
 Another’s wealth, and toil for future peace. 
Loath were the lovers; but the aunt declared
 ’Twas fortune’s call, and they must be prepared:
 ‘You now are young, and for this brief delay,
 And Dinah’s care, what I bequeath will pay –
 All will be yours! Nay, love, suppress that sigh! 
The kind must suffer, and the best must die!’ 
Then came the cough, and strong the signs it gave
 Of holding long contention with the grave. 
The lovers parted with a gloomy view,
 And little comfort, but that both were true;
 He for uncertain duties doomed to steer,
 While hers remained too certain and severe. 
Letters arrived, and Rupert fairly told
 His cares were many, and his hopes were cold:
 The view more clouded, that was never fair,
 And love alone preserved him from despair –
 In other letters brighter hopes he drew,
 His friends were kind, and he believed them true! 
When the sage widow Dinah’s grief descried,
 She wondered much why one so happy sighed,
 Then bade her see how her poor aunt sustained
 The ills of life, nor murmured nor complained. 
To vary pleasures, from the lady’s chest
 Were drawn the pearly string and tabby vest,
 Beads, jewels, laces, all their value shown,
 With the kind notice – ‘They will be your own!’ 
This hope, these comforts, cherished day by day,
 To Dinah’s bosom made a gradual way,
 Till love of treasure had as large a part
 As love of Rupert, in the virgin’s heart. 
Whether it be that tender passions fail,
 From their own nature, while the strong prevail;
 Or whether avarice, like the poison-tree,
 Kills all beside it, and alone will be –
 Whatever cause prevailed, the pleasure grew
 In Dinah’s soul: she loved the hoards to view;
 With lively joy those comforts she surveyed,
 And love grew languid in the careful maid. 
Now the grave niece partook the widow’s cares,
 Looked to the great, and ruled the small affairs;
 Saw cleaned the plate, arranged the china-show,
 And felt her passion for a shilling grow:
 The indulgent aunt increased the maid’s delight,
 By placing tokens of her wealth in sight;
 She loved the value of her bonds to tell,
 And spake of stocks, and how they rose and fell. 
This passion grew, and gained at length such sway
 That other passions shrank to make it way;
 Romantic notions now the heart forsook,
 She read but seldom, and she changed her book;
 And for the verses she was wont to send,
 Short was her prose – and she was Rupert’s friend. 
Seldom she wrote, and then the widow’s cough,
 And constant call, excused her breaking off;
 Who, now oppressed, no longer took the air,
 But sat and dozed upon an easy chair. 
The cautious doctor saw the case was clear,
 But judged it best to have companions near;
 They came, they reasoned, they prescribed – at last,
 Like honest men, they said their hopes were past! 
Then came a priest – ’tis comfort to reflect,
 When all is over, there was no neglect! 
And all was over: by her husband’s bones
 The widow rests beneath the sculptured stones
 That yet record their fondness and their fame;
 While all they left, the virgin’s care became –
 Stock, bonds, and buildings! It disturbed her rest
 To think what load of troubles she possessed;
 Yet, if a trouble, she resolved to take
 The important duty for the donor’s sake! 
She too was heiress to the widow’s taste,
 Her love of hoarding, and her dread of waste. 
Sometimes the past would on her mind intrude,
 And then a conflict full of care ensued:
 The thoughts of Rupert on her mind would press –
 His worth she knew, but doubted his success –
 Of old she saw him heedless: what the boy
 Forbore to save, the man would not enjoy. 
Oft had he lost the chance that care would seize,
 Willing to live, but more to live at ease –
 Yet could she not a broken vow defend,
 And Heaven, perhaps, might yet enrich her friend! 
Month after month was passed, and all were spent
 In quiet comfort and in rich content:
 Miseries there were, and woes the world around,
 But these had not her pleasant dwelling found;
 She knew that mothers grieved, and widows wept,
 And she was sorry, said her prayers, and slept! 
Thus passed the seasons, and to Dinah’s board
 Gave what the seasons to the rich afford;
 For she indulged – nor was her heart so small,
 That one strong passion should engross it all! 
A love of splendour now with avarice strove,
 And oft appeared to be the stronger love:
 A secret pleasure filled the Widow’s breast
 When she reflected on the hoards possessed,
 But livelier joy inspired the ambitious Maid
 When she the purchase of those hoards displayed. 
In small but splendid room she loved to see
 That all was placed in view and harmony;
 There, as with eager glance she looked around,
 She much delight in every object found;
 While books devout were near her – to destroy,
 Should it arise, an overflow of joy! 
Within that fair apartment guests might see
 The comforts culled for wealth by vanity:
 Around the room an Indian paper blazed,
 With lively tint and figures boldly raised;
 Silky and soft upon the floor below,
 The elastic carpet rose with crimson glow. 
All things around implied both cost and care –
 What met the eye was elegant or rare! 
Some curious trifles round the room were laid,
 By hope presented to the wealthy maid;
 Within a costly case of varnished wood,
 In level rows, her polished volumes stood
 Shown as a favour to a chosen few,
 To prove what beauty for a book could do);
 A silver urn with curious work was fraught,
 A silver lamp from Grecian pattern wrought;
 Above her head, all gorgeous to behold,
 A timepiece stood on feet of burnished gold. 
A stag’s-head crest adorned the pictured case –
 Through the pure crystal shone the enamelled face –
 And while on brilliants moved the hands of steel,
 It clicked from prayer to prayer, from meal to meal. 
Here as the lady sat, a friendly pair
 Stepped in to admire the view, and took their chair –
 They then related how the young and gay
 Were thoughtless wandering in the broad highway,
 How tender damsels sailed in tilted boats
 And laughed with wicked men in scarlet coats,
 And how we live in such degenerate times
 That men conceal their wants, and show their crimes,
 While vicious deeds are screened by fashion’s name,
 And what was once our pride is now our shame. 
Dinah was musing, as her friends discoursed,
 When these last words a sudden entrance forced
 Upon her mind – and ‘what was once her pride
 And now her shame’ some painful views supplied. 
Thoughts of the past within her bosom pressed,
 And there a change was felt, and was confessed. 
While thus the virgin strove with secret pain,
 Her mind was wandering o’er the troubled main –
 Still she was silent, nothing seemed to see,
 But sat and sighed in pensive reverie. 
The friends prepared new subjects to begin –
 When tall Susannah, maiden starch, stalked in! 
Not in her ancient mode, sedate and slow,
 As when she came, the mind she knew, to know;
 Nor as, when listening half an hour before,
 She twice or thrice tapped gently at the door;
 But, all decorum cast in wrath aside,
 ‘I think the devil’s in the man!’ she cried –
 ‘A huge tall sailor, with his tawny cheek,
 And pitted face, will with my lady speak! 
He grinned an ugly smile, and said he knew,
 Please you, my lady, ’twould be joy to you –
 What must I answer?’ Trembling and distressed
 Sank the pale Dinah by her fears oppressed,
 When, thus alarmed, and brooking no delay,
 Swift to her room the stranger made his way. 
Revive, my love’, said he, ‘I’ve done thee harm –
 Give me thy pardon!’ and he looked alarm. 
Meantime the prudent Dinah had contrived
 Her soul to question, and she then revived. 
‘See, my good friend’ – and then she raised her head –
 The bloom of life, the strength of youth is fled! 
Living we die – to us the world is dead! 
We parted blest with health, and I am now
 Age-struck and feeble – so I find art thou:
 Thine eye is sunken, furrowed is thy face,
 And downward lookst thou. So we run our race –
 And happier they whose race is nearly run,
 Their troubles over, and their duties done!’ 
‘True, lady, true – we are not girl and boy,
 But time has left us something to enjoy.’ 
What! thou hast learned my fortune? Yes, I live
 To feel how poor the comforts wealth can give! 
Thou too perhaps art wealthy – but our fate
 Still mocks our wishes! Wealth is come too late.’ 

‘To me, nor late nor early! I am come
 Poor as I left thee to my native home –
 Nor yet’, said Rupert, ‘will I grieve. ’Tis mine
 To share thy comforts, and the glory thine:
 For thou wilt gladly take that generous part
 That both exalts and gratifies the heart;
 While mine rejoices –’ ‘Heavens!’ returned the maid,
 ‘This talk to one so withered and decayed? 
No! all my care is now to fit my mind
 For other spousal, and to die resigned. 
As friend and neighbour, I shall hope to see
 These noble views, this pious love, in thee –
 That we together may the change await
 (Guides and spectators in each other’s fate),
 When, fellow-pilgrims, we shall daily crave
 The mutual prayer that arms us for the grave!’ 
Half angry, half in doubt, the lover gazed
 On the meek maiden, by her speech amazed:
 ‘Dinah’, said he, ‘dost thou respect thy vows? 
What spousal meanest thou? Thou art Rupert’s spouse! 
The chance is mine to take, and thine to give –
 But, trifling this, if we together live. 
Can I believe that after all the past,
 Our vows, our loves, thou wilt be false at last? 
Something thou hast – I know not what – in view:
 I find thee pious – let me find thee true!’ 
Ah, cruel this – but do, my friend, depart,
 And to its feelings leave my wounded heart!’ 
‘Nay, speak at once – and Dinah, let me know,
 Meanest thou to take me, now I’m wrecked, in tow? 
Be fair; nor longer keep me in the dark –
 Am I forsaken for a trimmer spark? 
Heaven’s spouse thou art not; nor can I believe
 That God accepts her who will man deceive! 
True I am shattered – I have service seen,
 And service done, and have in trouble been! 
My cheek (it shames me not) has lost its red,
 And the brown buff is o’er my features spread. 
Perchance my speech is rude, for I among
 The untamed have been, in temper and in tongue –
 Have been trepanned, have lived in toil and care,
 And wrought for wealth I was not doomed to share. 
It touched me deeply, for I felt a pride
 In gaining riches for my destined bride! 
Speak then my fate. For these my sorrows past,
 Time lost, youth fled, hope wearied, and at last
 This doubt of thee (a childish thing to tell,
 But certain truth) – my very throat they swell;
 They stop the breath, and but for shame could I
 Give way to weakness, and with passion cry. 
These are unmanly struggles, but I feel
 This hour must end them – and perhaps will heal.’ 
Here Dinah sighed, as if afraid to speak,
 And then repeated – they were frail and weak;
 His soul she loved, and hoped he had the grace
 To fix his thoughts upon a better place. 
She ceased. With steady glance, as if to see
 The very root of this hypocrisy,
 He her small fingers moulded in his hard
 And bronzed broad hand – then told her his regard,
 His best respect were gone, but love had still
 Hold in his heart, and governed yet the will,
 Or he would curse her. Saying this, he threw
 The hand in scorn away, and bade adieu
 To every lingering hope, with every care in view. 
Proud and indignant, suffering, sick, and poor,
 He grieved unseen, and spoke of love no more –
 Till all he felt in indignation died,
 As hers had sunk in avarice and pride. 
In health declining, as in mind distressed,
 To some in power his troubles he confessed,
 And shares a parish-gift. At prayers he sees
 The pious Dinah dropped upon her knees;
 Thence as she walks the street with stately air
 As chance directs, oft meet the parted pair. 
When he, with thickset coat of badge-man’s blue,
 Moves near her shaded silk of changeful hue;
 When his thin locks of gray approach her braid
 (A costly purchase made in beauty’s aid);
 When his frank air, and his unstudied pace,
 Are seen with her soft manner, air, and grace,
 And his plain artless look with her sharp meaning face;
 It might some wonder in a stranger move,
 How these together could have talked of love. 
Behold them now! See there a tradesman stands,
 And humbly hearkens to some fresh commands. 
He moves to speak, she interrupts him: ‘Stay!’ 
Her air expresses – ‘Hark to what I say!’ 
Ten paces off, poor Rupert on a seat
 Has taken refuge from the noonday heat,
 His eyes on her intent, as if to find
 What were the movements of that subtle mind. 
How still, how earnest is he! It appears
 His thoughts are wandering through his earlier years –
 Through years of fruitless labour, to the day
 When all his earthly prospects died away:
 Had I’, he thinks, ‘been wealthier of the two,
 Would she have found me so unkind, untrue? 
Or knows not man when poor, what man when rich will do? 
Yes, yes! I feel that I had faithful proved,
 And should have soothed and raised her, blest and loved!’ 
But Dinah moves – she had observed before,
 The pensive Rupert at an humble door. 
Some thoughts of pity raised by his distress,
 Some feeling touch of ancient tenderness;
 Religion, duty, urged the maid to speak,
 In terms of kindness to a man so weak;
 But pride forbade – and to return would prove
 She felt the shame of his neglected love. 
Nor wrapped in silence could she pass, afraid
 Each eye should see her, and each heart upbraid. 
One way remained – the way the Levite took,
 Who without mercy could on misery look
 (A way perceived by craft, approved by pride),
 She crossed and passed him on the other side. 
