Sappho’s Last Song

Peaceful night, shamefaced light
Of the fading moon, and you, star of the morning,
As you rise above silent cliff-top woods —
How I loved fine sights like these
Before learning what fate and the furies were;
But such calm, quiet scenes can now
Cheer my hopeless heart no more.
I feel, now, such unaccustomed joy
Only when dusty southern winds
Cleave the air and swirl a path
Through shivering grass, or thunder rolls
Like Jove’s great chariot over my head,
Splitting the pitch-black air wide open. Now
It is stormy weather I love plunging into
Along the crags and through deep valleys,
Seeing terror-stricken flocks in scattered flight,
Or hearing wave after wave go rushing over
Crumbled banks: the swollen torrent’s headlong roar.

How gorgeous the earth is, drenched in dew,
And your wide cloak, divine sky. But ah,
The gods and grim-lipped fate have given
Poor Sappho no part of this infinite beauty.
A tiresome wretched guest in your
Grand, indifferent domain, Nature,
I lift like an abandoned lover
My beggar’s heart and beggar’s eyes
Up to all your lovely forms. The sunny
Riverbanks don’t smile at me, nor dawn’s
White light in the sky; bright-winged birds
Don’t sing to me, beechtrees don’t greet me
With murmuring leaves, and where clear water
Runs under the bending willow’s shade
The stream slides and winds away
In scorn from these soiled and slippery feet,
Hugging the sweet-scented bank as it flees.

What offense, what loathsome crime marked me
Before I was born, making heaven and the face
Of fortune frown as they did? What sin
Did I commit as a child — when one can know
No wrong at all — that my iron-dark thread of life,
Lacking all the summer colors of youth,
Lay twisted on fate’s implacable spindle? Reckless
Words fly from your mouth: A hidden purpose
Fashions whatever has to happen. Everything is hidden
Except our pain. We come, a forsaken race,
Crying into the world, and the gods
Keep their own counsel. Ah, those hopes and cares
Of our early years! God gives to good looks
Lasting power amongst men and women:
Neither high heroic deeds nor skill
In lyric song or learned poem will shine
Through the tattered Coat of a body like mine.

I shall die. With its poor unworthy cloak cast off,
My naked soul will seek some refuge
In the land of the dead, righting the cruel wrong
That chance — blindly parceling*out our lives —
Inflicted. And you for whom I’ve spent the years
; in fruitless love — faithful forever, forever burning
In an empty frenzy of unsatisfied desire —
Be happy, ifcany mortal at all on earth
May be happy. From his miser’s store
Of sweet blessings, God? gave me nothing
Once my dream of youth and its illusions
Withered. Our happiest days are first to fly,
Leaving illness, old age, and the icy-handed
Shadow of death. And so, of all those hopes
And high ambitions, all those dear
Enchantments of the heart, only death itself
Is left; and this quick, bright spirit of mine
To the queen of shadows must be handed over,
And to black night, and the speechless shore.
