Adonais: An Elegy on the Death of John Keats

[St. 1 – 8, 39 – 58]

I.

I weep for Adonais – he is dead! 
Oh weep for Adonais – though our tears
 Thaw not the frost which binds so dear a head! 
And thou, sad Hour, selected from all years
 To mourn our loss, rouse thy obscure compeers,
 And teach them thine own sorrow, say: ‘With me
 Died Adonais; till the future dares
 Forget the past, his fate and fame shall be
 An echo and a light unto eternity!’ 

II.

Where wert thou, mighty Mother, when he lay –
 When thy Son lay – pierced by the shaft which flies
 In darkness? Where was lorn Urania
 When Adonais died? With veiled eyes,
 Mid listening Echoes, in her paradise
 She sat while one, with soft enamoured breath,
 Rekindled all the fading melodies
 With which, like flowers that mock the corse beneath,
 He had adorned and hid the coming bulk of death. 

III.

Oh weep for Adonais – he is dead! 
Wake, melancholy Mother, wake and weep! 
Yet wherefore? Quench within their burning bed
 Thy fiery tears, and let thy loud heart keep
 Like his a mute and uncomplaining sleep;
 For he is gone, where all things wise and fair
 Descend; – oh dream not that the amorous deep
 Will yet restore him to the vital air:
 Death feeds on his mute voice, and laughs at our despair. 

IV.

Most musical of mourners, weep again! 
Lament anew, Urania! He died,
 Who was the sire of an immortal strain,
 (Blind, old and lonely) when his country’s pride,
 The priest, the slave, and the liberticide,
 Trampled and mocked with many a loathéd rite
 Of lust and blood – he went, unterrified,
 Into the gulf of death – but his clear sprite
 Yet reigns o’er earth, the third among the sons of light. 

V.

Most musical of mourners, weep anew! 
Not all to that bright station dared to climb –
 And happier they their happiness who knew,
 Whose tapers yet burn through that night of time
 In which suns perished; others more sublime,
 Struck by the envious wrath of man or god,
 Have sunk, extinct in their refulgent prime;
 And some yet live, treading the thorny road,
 Which leads, through toil and hate, to Fame’s serene abode. 

VI.

But now thy youngest, dearest, one has perished –
 The nursling of thy widowhood, who grew
 Like a pale flower by some sad maiden cherished,
 And fed with true-love tears instead of dew –
 Most musical of mourners, weep anew! 
Thy extreme hope, the loveliest and the last
 (The bloom whose petals, nipped before they blew,
 Died on the promise of the fruit) is waste! 
The broken lily lies – the storm is overpast. 

VII.

To that high capital, where kingly Death
 Keeps his pale court in beauty and decay,
 He came; and bought, with price of purest breath,
 A grave among the eternal. Come away! 
Haste, while the vault of blue Italian day
 Is yet his fitting charnel-roof – while still
 He lies, as if in dewy sleep he lay! 
Awake him not – surely he takes his fill
 Of deep and liquid rest, forgetful of all ill. 

VIII.

He will awake no more, oh never more! 
Within the twilight chamber spreads apace
 The shadow of white Death, and at the door
 Invisible Corruption waits to trace
 His extreme way to her dim dwelling-place;
 The eternal Hunger sits, but pity and awe
 Soothe her pale rage, nor dares she to deface
 So fair a prey, till darkness, and the law
 Of mortal change, shall fill the grave which is her maw …

XXXIX.

Peace, peace! He is not dead, he doth not sleep –
 He hath awakened from the dream of life –
 ’Tis we who, lost in stormy visions, keep
 With phantoms an unprofitable strife,
 And in mad trance strike with our spirit’s knife
 Invulnerable nothings. We decay
 Like corpses in a charnel; fear and grief
 Convulse us and consume us day by day,
 And cold hopes swarm like worms within our living clay. 

XL.

He has outsoared the shadow of our night –
 Envy and calumny and hate and pain,
 And that unrest which men miscall delight,
 Can touch him not and torture not again. 
From the contagion of the world’s slow stain
 He is secure, and now can never mourn
 A heart grown cold, a head grown grey in vain;
 Nor, when the spirit’s self has ceased to burn,
 With sparkless ashes load an unlamented urn. 

XLI.

He lives, he wakes! ’Tis Death is dead, not he –
 Mourn not for Adonais. Thou young Dawn,
 Turn all thy dew to splendour, for from thee
 The spirit thou lamentest is not gone. 
Ye caverns and ye forests, cease to moan! 
Cease, ye faint flowers and fountains, and thou air,
 Which like a mourning veil thy scarf hadst thrown
 O’er the abandoned earth, now leave it bare
 Even to the joyous stars which smile on its despair! 

XLII.

He is made one with Nature: there is heard
 His voice in all her music, from the moan
 Of thunder, to the song of night’s sweet bird;
 He is a presence to be felt and known
 In darkness and in light, from herb and stone,
 Spreading itself where’er that Power may move
 Which has withdrawn his being to its own –
 Which wields the world with never-wearied love,
 Sustains it from beneath, and kindles it above. 

XLIII.

He is a portion of the loveliness
 Which once he made more lovely: he doth bear
 His part, while the one Spirit’s plastic stress
 Sweeps through the dull dense world, compelling there,
 All new successions to the forms they wear –
 Torturing the unwilling dross that checks its flight
 To its own likeness (as each mass may bear)
 And bursting in its beauty and its might
 From trees and beasts and men into the Heaven’s light. 

XLIV.

The splendours of the firmament of time
 May be eclipsed, but are extinguished not;
 Like stars to their appointed height they climb,
 And death is a low mist which cannot blot
 The brightness it may veil. When lofty thought
 Lifts a young heart above its mortal lair,
 And love and life contend in it for what
 Shall be its earthly doom, the dead live there
 And move like winds of light on dark and stormy air. 

XLV.

The inheritors of unfulfilled renown
 Rose from their thrones, built beyond mortal thought,
 Far in the unapparent. Chatterton
 Rose pale, his solemn agony had not
 Yet faded from him; Sidney, as he fought
 And as he fell and as he lived and loved
 Sublimely mild (a spirit without spot)
 Arose; and Lucan, by his death approved –
 Oblivion as they rose shrank like a thing reproved. 

XLVI.

And many more, whose names on earth are dark,
 But whose transmitted effluence cannot die
 So long as fire outlives the parent spark,
 Rose, robed in dazzling immortality. 
Thou art become as one of us’, they cry,
 ‘It was for thee yon kingless sphere has long
 Swung blind in unascended majesty,
 Silent alone amid an heaven of song. 
Assume thy winged throne, thou Vesper of our throng!’ 

XLVII.

Who mourns for Adonais? Oh come forth,
 Fond wretch, and know thyself and him aright! 
Clasp with thy panting soul the pendulous earth –
 As from a centre, dart thy spirit’s light
 Beyond all worlds, until its spacious might
 Satiate the void circumference; then shrink
 Even to a point within our day and night,
 And keep thy heart light lest it make thee sink
 When hope has kindled hope, and lured thee to the brink. 

XLVIII.

Or go to Rome, which is the sepulchre,
 Oh, not of him, but of our joy! ’Tis nought
 That ages, empires, and religions there
 Lie buried in the ravage they have wrought;
 For such as he, can lend! They borrow not
 Glory from those who made the world their prey –
 And he is gathered to the kings of thought
 Who waged contention with their time’s decay,
 And of the past are all that cannot pass away. 

XLIX.

Go thou to Rome – at once the paradise,
 The grave, the city, and the wilderness –
 And where its wrecks like shattered mountains rise,
 And flowering weeds and fragrant copses dress
 The bones of Desolation’s nakedness,
 Pass, till the spirit of the spot shall lead
 Thy footsteps to a slope of green access
 Where, like an infant’s smile, over the dead
 A light of laughing flowers along the grass is spread. 

L.

And grey walls moulder round, on which dull time
 Feeds, like slow fire upon a hoary brand,
 And one keen pyramid with wedge sublime,
 Pavilioning the dust of him who planned
 This refuge for his memory, doth stand
 Like flame transformed to marble; and beneath,
 A field is spread, on which a newer band
 Have pitched in Heaven’s smile their camp of death,
 Welcoming him we lose with scarce extinguished breath. 

LI.

Here pause: these graves are all too young as yet
 To have outgrown the sorrow which consigned
 Its charge to each – and if the seal is set,
 Here, on one fountain of a mourning mind,
 Break it not thou! Too surely shalt thou find
 Thine own well full, if thou returnest home,
 Of tears and gall. From the world’s bitter wind
 Seek shelter in the shadow of the tomb –
 What Adonais is, why fear we to become? 

LII.

The One remains, the many change and pass;
 Heaven’s light forever shines, Earth’s shadows fly;
 Life, like a dome of many-coloured glass,
 Stains the white radiance of Eternity,
 Until Death tramples it to fragments. Die,
 If thou wouldst be with that which thou dost seek! 
Follow where all is fled! Rome’s azure sky,
 Flowers, ruins, statues, music, words, are weak
 The glory they transfuse with fitting truth to speak. 

LIII.

Why linger, why turn back, why shrink, my heart? 
Thy hopes are gone before: from all things here
 They have departed, thou shouldst now depart! 
A light is passed from the revolving year,
 And man, and woman – and what still is dear
 Attracts to crush, repels to make thee wither. 
The soft sky smiles, the low wind whispers near:
 ’Tis Adonais calls! Oh hasten thither –
 No more let Life divide what Death can join together. 

LIV.

That Light whose smile kindles the universe,
 That Beauty in which all things work and move,
 That Benediction which the eclipsing curse
 Of birth can quench not, that sustaining Love,
 Which through the web of being (blindly wove
 By man and beast and earth and air and sea)
 Burns bright or dim, as each are mirrors of
 The fire for which all thirst – now beams on me,
 Consuming the last clouds of cold mortality. 

LV.

The breath whose might I have invoked in song
 Descends on me – my spirit’s bark is driven
 Far from the shore, far from the trembling throng
 Whose sails were never to the tempest given. 
The massy earth and sphered skies are riven! 
I am borne darkly, fearfully, afar,
 Whilst, burning through the inmost veil of Heaven,
 The soul of Adonais like a star
 Beacons from the abode where the Eternal are. 
