The Prelude

[Book X. ‘Residence in France and French Revolution’, ll. 201-210, 218-274 (War and Alienation: London and Wales, 1793 – 1794)]

When to my native land
 (After a whole year’s absence) I returned
 I found the air yet busy with the stir
 Of a contention which had been raised up
 Against the traffickers in negro blood –
 An effort which, though baffled, nevertheless
 Had called back old forgotten principles
 Dismissed from service, had diffused some truths,
 And more of virtuous feeling, through the heart
 Of the English people. 
For me that strife had ne’er
 Fastened on my affections – nor did now
 Its unsuccessful issue much excite
 My sorrow, having laid this faith to heart
 That if France prospered good men would not long
 Pay fruitless worship to humanity,
 And this most rotten branch of human shame
 Object, it seemed, of a superfluous pains)
 Would fall together with its parent tree. 
Such was my then belief – that there was one,
 And only one, solicitude for all! 
And now the strength of Britain was put forth
 In league with the confederated host;
 Not in my single self alone I found,
 But in the minds of all ingenuous youth,
 Change and subversion from that hour. No shock
 Given to my moral nature had I known
 Down to that moment – neither lapse,
 Nor turn of sentiment, that might be named
 A revolution, save at this one time! 
All else was progress on the self-same path
 On which, with a diversity of pace,
 I had been travelling – this, a stride at once
 Into another region. 
True it is
 ’Twas not concealed with what ungracious eyes
 Our native rulers from the very first
 Had looked upon regenerated France,
 Nor had I doubted that this day would come;
 But in such contemplation I had thought
 Of general interests only, beyond this
 Had never once foretasted the event. 
Now I had other business, for I felt
 The ravage of this most unnatural strife
 In my own heart. There it lay like a weight,
 At enmity with all the tenderest springs
 Of my enjoyments. I who with the breeze
 Had played, a green leaf on the bless
                  ed
                 tree
 Of my beloved country (nor had wished
 For happier fortune than to wither there),
 Now from my pleasant station was cut off,
 And tossed about in whirlwinds. I rejoiced –
 Yea, afterwards, truth painful to record,
 Exulted in the triumph of my soul,
 When Englishmen by thousands were o’erthrown,
 Left without glory on the field, or driven,
 Brave hearts, to shameful flight. It was a grief –
 Grief call it not, ’twas anything but that –
 A conflict of sensations without name,
 Of which he only who may love the sight
 Of a village-steeple as I do can judge,
 When in the congregation, bending all
 To their great Father, prayers were offered up
 Or praises for our country’s victories,
 And, mid the simple worshippers perchance
 I only, like an uninvited guest
 Whom no one owned, sat silent – shall I add
 Fed on the day of vengeance yet to come! 
