To the Poet Coleridge

Rapt in the visionary theme,
 Spirit divine, with thee I’ll wander,
 Where the blue, wavy, lucid stream
 Mid forest-glooms shall slow meander! 
With thee I’ll trace the circling bounds
 Of thy new paradise, extended,
 And listen to the varying sounds
 Of winds and foamy torrents blended. 

Now by the source which labouring heaves
 The mystic fountain, bubbling, panting,
 While gossamer its network weaves
 Adown the blue lawn slanting –
 I’ll mark thy ‘sunny dome’ and view
 Thy ‘caves of ice’, thy fields of dew,
 Thy ever-blooming mead, whose flower
 Waves to the cold breath of the moonlight hour! 
Or when the day-star, peering bright
 On the grey wing of parting night,
 With more than vegetating power
 Throbs, grateful to the burning hour,
 As summer’s whispered sighs unfold
 Her million million buds of gold,
 Then will I climb the breezy bounds
 Of thy new paradise, extended,
 And listen to the different sounds
 Of winds and foamy torrents blended! 

Spirit divine, with thee I’ll trace
 Imagination’s boundless space! 
With thee, beneath thy ‘sunny dome’
 I’ll listen to the minstrel’s lay
 Hymning the gradual close of day,
 In ‘caves of ice’ enchanted roam,
 Where on the glittering entrance plays
 The moon’s beam with its silvery rays,
 Or when the glassy stream
 That through the deep dell flows
 Flashes the noon’s hot beam –
 The noon’s hot beam that midway shows
 Thy flaming temple, studded o’er
 With all Peruvia’s lustrous store! 
There will I trace the circling bounds
 Of thy new paradise, extended,
 And listen to the awful sounds
 Of winds and foamy torrents blended. 

And now I’ll pause to catch the moan
 Of distant breezes, cavern-pent;
 Now, ere the twilight tints are flown,
 Purpling the landscape far and wide
 On the dark promontory’s side
 I’ll gather wild-flowers dew-besprent
 And weave a crown for thee,
 Genius of Heaven-taught poesy! 
While, opening to my wondering eyes
 Thou bidst a new Creation rise,
 I’ll raptured trace the circling bounds
 Of thy rich paradise, extended,
 And listen to the varying sounds
 Of winds and foamy torrents blended. 

And now, with lofty tones inviting,
 Thy nymph, her dulcimer swift-smiting,
 Shall wake me in ecstatic measures,
 Far, far removed from mortal pleasures,
 In cadence rich, in cadence strong,
 Proving the wondrous witcheries of song! 
I hear her voice – thy ‘sunny dome’,
 Thy ‘caves of ice’, aloud repeat –
 Vibrations maddening, sweet,
 Calling the visionary wanderer home! 
She sings of thee, oh favoured child
 Of minstrelsy, sublimely wild –
 Of thee whose soul can feel the tone
 Which gives to airy dreams a magic all their own! 
