To the Hungarians

I.

Oh you, once mighty Hungary, gone to seed,
 can you not see the blood of Árpád go foul,
 can you not see the mighty lashes
 heaven has slapped on your dreary country? 

Amidst the storms of eight blood-soaked centuries
 the battered towers of Buda still stand aloft
 although a thousand times, in anger,
 you trod upon your own self, your own kin. 

Your beastly morals scatter it all to dust –
 a brood of vipers, venomous, hideous,
 lay waste the castle which beheld the
 hundreds of sieges it used to smile at. 

You stood defiant even against the wild
 Xerxes-like hordes of Outer-Mongolia;
 you could resist even world-conquering Turkey’s
 mighty assault on the East and yonder;

you did survive the murderous century
 of Zápolya – the secret assassins’ hands –
 while you stood firm amidst the flames of
 family blood-feuds in retribution,

for you were led by virtues of yesteryear –
 with Spartan arms you conquered throughout your wars;
 wrestling you won, and Hercules-like
 war-hammers shook in your steely fist-hold. 

But now – you are gnawed by venomous, stealthy death. 
Behold: the oak that proudly withstands the storm
 that cannot break it from the North, but
 vermin can chew up its mighty root-work

and then it’s felled by only a flimsy breeze! 
That’s why the firm foundation of every land
 must be morality untarnished
 which, if destroyed, Rome will fall and founder. 

What are Hungarians now?! Sybaritic wrecks –
 they’ve ripped their splendid native insignia off
 while, from their homeland’s ravaged bulwarks,
 building a palace as lair of leisure –

they shed their ancient mantle of champions;
 forget their tongue; they’re aping the strangers’ talk;
 they stomp the nation’s Guardian Soul, and
 foolishly worship a childish idol. 

How diff’rent rang the thunder of Hungary
 amidst the blood-soaked battles of Attila,
 who boldly faced half of the world in
 punitive anger against the foul West! 

Árpád, our Chief, the founder of Hungary,
 had braver troops to fight the Danubian shores,
 how diff’rent were the swords of Hungary
 Hunyadi used to repel the Sultan! 

But woe – this is how everything perishes. 
We bear the yoke of fickle vicissitudes;
 the fairy mood of Luck has tossed us
 playfully upward and down, while smiling. 

The iron fist of centuries finishes
 but all that man has built; gone is noble Troy;
 gone are the might and pride of Carthage,
 Babylon, Rome – they have all gone under. 
