On the Inhumanity of the Slave Trade

[Ll. 243-291, 347-352]

The sun had reached
 His zenith. Pausing faintly, Luco stood
 Leaning upon his hoe, while memory brought,
 In piteous imagery, his agéd father,
 His poor fond mother, and his faithful maid. 
The mental group in wildest motion set
 Fruitless imagination – fury, grief,
 Alternate shame, the sense of insult, all
 Conspire to aid the inward storm! Yet words
 Were no relief: he stood in silent woe. 
Gorgon, remorseless Christian, saw the slave
 Stand musing mid the ranks and, stealing soft
 Behind the studious Luco, struck his cheek
 With a too-heavy whip that reached his eye,
 Making it dark for ever. Luco turned
 In strongest agony, and with his hoe
 Struck the rude Christian on the forehead. Pride,
 With hateful malice, seized on Gorgon’s soul
 (By nature fierce), while Luco sought the beach
 And plunged beneath the wave. But near him lay
 A planter’s barge, whose seamen grasped his hair,
 Dragging to life a wretch who wished to die. 
Rumour now spreads the tale, while Gorgon’s breath
 Envenomed aids her blast. Imputed crimes
 Oppose the plea of Luco, till he scorns
 Even a just defence, and stands prepared. 
The planters, conscious that to fear alone
 They owe their cruel power, resolve to blend
 New torment with the pangs of death, and hold
 Their victim high in dreadful view to fright
 The wretched number left. Luco is chained
 To a huge tree, his fellow-slaves are ranged
 To share the horrid sight; fuel is placed
 In an increasing train, some paces back,
 To kindle slowly, and approach the youth,
 With more than native terror. 
See, it burns! 
He gazes on the growing flame, and calls
 For ‘Water, water!’ The small boon’s denied. 
E’en Christians throng each other to behold
 The different alterations of his face
 As the hot death approaches. (Oh shame, shame
 Upon the followers of Jesus! Shame
 On him that dares avow a God!) He writhes,
 While down his breast glide the unpitied tears,
 And in their sockets strain their scorchéd balls. 
‘Burn, burn me quick! I cannot die!’ he cries,
 ‘Bring fire more close!’ The planters heed him not,
 But still prolonging Luco’s torture, threat
 Their trembling slaves around
 Gracious God!
 Why thus in mercy let thy whirlwinds sleep
 O’er a vile race of Christians, who profane
 Thy glorious attributes? Sweep them from Earth,
 Or check their cruel power! The savage tribes
 Are angels when compared to brutes like these. 
