Spain after the March Revolution

[excerpt]

Tell me, what was the nation which destiny once proclaimed the queen of the world, she who extended her golden sceptre and her divine escutcheon over all parts of the globe? She flew to the West and the vast Atlantic Ocean was seeded with glory and fortune. Wherever Spain found herself: in the valued bosom of America, in Asia, in the vast extremities of Africa, there was Spain. What plagues, o Lord! Pestilent fever, its impure breath cast over us, infests the air, poisons life; shrivelling hunger stretched out its livid arms, smothering everything that contagion permitted. What did you see (after a series of military and naval defeats) but baleful mourning, deep sadness, misery withoutequal, the bitter fruit of your vile servitude? But, at last the moment came; the tyrant ofthe world [Napoleon] extended his hand to the West and fiercely exclaimed: ‘The West is mine’. Barbarous pleasure on his grim brow flashed for a moment like a fleeting ray of lightning in summer in the dark bosom of a thunder cloud, adding horror with its sombre glow. Spain stirred at the contemptible commotion which she heard approaching and at the great impulse of her just rage she broke open the volcano which boiled within her. Her ancient despots hid away pallid and in consternation; the echo of revenge sounded all around and the banks of the Tagus responded ‘Revenge’. Where are they, o sacred river, the colossi of ignominy and shame who smothered our worth in their insolence? You once represented glory, our splendour now commences and you, proud and fierce, seeing that there still remain Castile and Castilians, hasten your silver waves to the sea crying ‘An end to tyrants’. O triumph! O glory! O heavenly moment! Spaniards, to war, to war! In the Guadalquivir see the venerable shade of Ferdinand III arise in anger; see Gonzalo of imperial Granada show his divine face, see the Cid wield his flashing sword. With stern scowl and disdainful of pain, see how they stream through the vain airs and, exhaling the valour which has been enclosed in the hollow of their cold tombs, they cry, with a fierce and hoarse voice, ‘War!’ Awake, o race of heroes, that moment has now come to throw yourselves into victory; that your name will eclipseour name, that your glory will give shame to our glory. The altar of the motherland raised in vain by your strong hand on this great day has not been in vain. Swear, she demands it of you: ‘death before we ever consent to any tyrant!’ Yes, I swear it, venerable shades, I, too, swear it, and in this moment, I feel I have come of age. Give me a lance, crown me with the fierce and gleaming helmet, let us fly to combat, to vengeance, and he who denies his breast to hope let his cowardly brow sink in the dust. Perhaps the great torrent of devastation will take me off. What does it matter? Will I not die to meet our illustrious forebears? I salute you, fathers of my homeland, I say ‘good health’. Heroic Spain, amid universal destruction and horrors raises her bloodied head and, conqueror of her evil destiny, returns to give her frightened land its golden sceptre and her divine escutcheon.
