Laon and Cythna

[Dedication, ll. 1-46, 91-126]

So now my summer task is ended, Mary,
 And I return to thee, mine own heart’s home,
 As to his Queen, some victor-knight of Fairy,
 Earning bright spoils for her enchanted dome. 
Nor thou disdain that ere my fame become
 A star among the stars of mortal night
 (If it indeed may cleave its natal gloom),
 Its doubtful promise thus I would unite
 With thy beloved name, thou child of love and light! 

The toil which stole from thee so many an hour
 Is ended – and the fruit is at thy feet! 
No longer where the woods, to frame a bower,
 With interlaced branches mix and meet,
 Or where, with sound like many voices sweet,
 Waterfalls leap among wild islands green
 (Which framed for my lone boat a lone retreat
 Of moss-grown trees and weeds), shall I be seen,
 But beside thee, where still my heart has ever been. 

Thoughts of great deeds were mine, dear friend, when first
 The clouds which wrap this world from youth did pass. 
I do remember well the hour which burst
 My spirit’s sleep. A fresh May-dawn it was
 When I walked forth upon the glittering grass,
 And wept – I knew not why – until there rose
 From the near school-room voices that, alas,
 Were but one echo from a world of woes,
 The harsh and grating strife of tyrants and of foes. 

And then I clasped my hands and looked around –
 But none was near to mock my streaming eyes,
 Which poured their warm drops on the sunny ground –
 So without shame I spoke: ‘I will be wise,
 And just, and free, and mild, if in me lies
 Such power, for I grow weary to behold
 The selfish and the strong still tyrannize
 Without reproach or check.’ I then controlled
 My tears, my heart grew calm, and I was meek and bold. 

And from that hour did I with earnest thought
 Heap knowledge from forbidden mines or lore,
 Yet nothing that my tyrants knew or taught
 I cared to learn, but from that secret store
 Wrought linked armour for my soul, before
 It might walk forth to war among mankind! 
Thus power and hope were strengthened more and more
 Within me, till there came upon my mind
 A sense of loneliness, a thirst with which I pined …

And what art thou? I know, but dare not speak –
 Time may interpret to his silent years! 
Yet in the paleness of thy thoughtful cheek,
 And in the light thine ample forehead wears,
 And in thy sweetest smiles, and in thy tears,
 And in thy gentle speech, a prophecy
 Is whispered to subdue my fondest fears. 
And through thine eyes – even in thy soul – I see
 A lamp of vestal fire burning internally. 

They say that thou wert lovely from thy birth
 (Of glorious parents) thou aspiring child! 
I wonder not, for one then left this Earth
 Whose life was like a setting planet mild
 Which clothed thee in the radiance undefiled
 Of its departing glory. Still her fame
 Shines on thee, through the tempests dark and wild
 Which shake these latter days – and thou canst claim
 The shelter from thy sire of an immortal name! 

One voice came forth from many a mighty spirit,
 Which was the echo of three thousand years,
 And the tumultuous world stood mute to hear it
 As some lone man who in a desert hears
 The music of his home! Unwonted fears
 Fell on the pale oppressors of our race,
 And Faith, and Custom, and low-thoughted cares,
 Like thunder-stricken dragons, for a space
 Left the torn human heart, their food and dwelling-place. 

Truth’s deathless voice pauses among mankind! 
If there must be no response to my cry –
 If men must rise and stamp, with fury blind,
 On his pure name who loves them – thou and I,
 Sweet friend, can look from our tranquility
 Like lamps into the world’s tempestuous night,
 Two tranquil stars, while clouds are passing by
 Which wrap them from the foundering seaman’s sight,
 That burn from year to year with unextinguished light. 
