The Shark

Though watchful Hell’s always out to get you,
 it has none but a distant dominion
 far from Paradise, and you have in you
 a place in your heart — hear it yearning? 
You look at the first bright rose of the sun,
 yes, first, but that’s second to your own face! 
“May night send me thousands of stars to bathe with. 
You, black cleft in the rocks, laugh among flowers. 
Now downward and near wheels the golden-winged
 that quickly left its branch for the rocky shore
 and there takes in beauties of sea and sky,
 and there heaves its voice with all its magic,
 harmonizing sea with desolate stone,
 and calls out the late night star that must rise. 
Birdie, airing your voice of miracles,
 if your marvelous song is not pure bliss,
 nothing good has flowered here or in heaven. 
Oh, if one stroke could get me where I’d go,
 sea-foam, keep me afloat till my return,
 with mother’s kiss, native earth in my fist. 
I kiss my hands and sweetly hug myself. 
My soul’s eyes are open wide and watching. 
So whence springs your birth, fountain so graceful?” 
Nature, you smiled at once and yielded to him. 
Hope, you bound his mind with all your magic powers. 
Lovely, new world full of joy and goodness. 
He looked around to see ............................. 
Now confronts the youth the tiger of the sea,
 and far, alas, from reach his sword and musket. 
How easily it slices through the deep
 and comes speeding ...................................
 for the pure white throat gleaming like a swan’s,
 for the strong broad chest and for the fair head,
 for the sweet magnanimous breath of youth,
 and thus the young man ...............................
 from Nature’s gorgeous, powerful embrace,
 in which she softly held and whispered him —
 while in his free, naked glowing body
 the crafts of swimmer and of warrior stirred. 
Before it passed the great soul filled with joy,
 in a bolt of light the young man knew himself. 
Worlds around him opened, showering him with crowns. 
Torso wondrous in your ruin and grandeur,
 dear lovely stranger in the bloom of youth,
 come, receive ashore the strong man’s lament. 
