The Monument of Peter the Great

Two youths stood deep in talk one rainy night,
Beneath one cloak, hand closely clasped in hand:
One was that pilgrim from a western land,
An unknown victim of the tsar’s grim might;
The other was the famous Russian bard,
Beloved through all the northland for his song.
Although their friendship had not flourished long,
They were united by a great regard.
Their souls soared over earthly trials and woe,
Like twin crags jutting from an Alpine peak:
Though separated by a roaring creek,
They scarcely hear the tumult of their foe,
While each to each their towering summits lean.
The Pilgrim mused on Peter’s awesome mien,
While gently thus the bard explained the scene:

“To the first tsar, of mighty fame and deed,
Great Catherine here a momument decreed.
So this gigantic image of the tsar
Bestrides the bronze back of a mettled steed
And waits for space where he may ride afar.

But Peter could not rest on Russian ground;
His native land was small for such as he:
His pedestal they sought beyond the sea.
From Finland’s shore they tore this granite mound,
Which, when the empress speaks and waves her hand,
Floats o’er the sea and runs across the land,
And falls into its place at her command.
The mound is ready now, and forth he goes,
A roman-toga’d tsar who rules by blows
His charger gallops up the granite steep,
Rearing its body for a mighty leap.

“In ancient Rome there shines in different guise
Marcus Aurelius, the people’s pride,
Who first made his name famous far and wide
By banishing the nation’s crafty spies.
When he has shamed the plunderers at home
And on the Rhine and the Pactolus’ banks
Has overwhelmed the fierce invaders’ ranks,
Homeward he turns his steps to peaceful Rome.
Fair, calm, and noble is that brow, aglow
With thoughts of all his people’s happiness.
He lifts with dignity his hand, as though
His thronging subjects he were now to bless;
And on his reins he drops his other hand
To check the zeal that in his charger burns.
You guess that in his path the masses stand
And shout: ‘Our father, Caesar, now returns!’
Amid the throng he fain would slowly ride,
With a paternal glance on every side.
The steed’s mane stands erect, its fierce eye rolls;
But knowing that it bears a well-loved guest,
The father of unnumbered Roman souls,
It checks its ardent spirit’s fiery zest:
The children can approach their father’s knee,
Along the road the steed strides evenly —
It will advance to immortality.

“His charger’s reins Tsar Peter has released;
He has been flying down the road, perchance,
And here the precipice checks his advance.
With hoofs aloft now stands the maddened beast,
Champing its bit unchecked, with slackened rein:
You guess that it will fall and be destroyed.
Thus it has galloped long, with tossing mane,
Like a cascade, leaping into the void,
That, fettered by the frost, hangs dizzily.
But soon will shine the sun of liberty,
And from the west a wind will warm this land. —
Will the cascade of liberty then stand?”
