Autumn

(A Fragment)

I

It is October, and the lingering leaves
Are disappearing from the naked branches;
The road is glazed, the cold of autumn breathes;
The millstream still sounds loudly as it passes,
But now, the pond is hard; out to the fields
My neighbour promptly leads his canine forces;
The frenzied sport lays waste the winter crops,
The sleeping groves are roused by baying dogs.

II

This is my season: Spring is quite the worst;
I hate the thaw, it makes me ill — stench, mire,
The blood is in a ferment, I am depressed.
The sternness of Midwinter I prefer;
How I love its snows, when free and fast
The sled speeds on beneath the evening star,
When she beside you gives your hand a squeeze,
Warm beneath fur, fresh, trembling and ablaze!

III

What a delight, to glide on fine sharp steel
Over the crystal river, far from shore!
The sparkle of a Winter festival! ...
But snow, when it has fallen half the year,
Inevitably loses its appeal,
Even for that deep burrower, the bear.
One can’t forever ride with young Armidas
Or mope by stoves in front of double windows.

IV

Glorious Summer! You I should love best
But for your dust and flies and scorching heat.
You torture us, destroy our faculties;
Like earth, we suffer drought — our only thought
Is how to satisfy our raging thirst.
The passing of Dame Winter we regret;
We saw her off with fruit liqueur and blinis,
And now we feast her with ice-cream and ice.

V

Autumn, I know, is commonly berated:
That sentiment, dear reader, isn't mine;
I love it for its quietly glowing beauty.
As to a child unloved by its own kin,
I am distinctly drawn to it — yes, Autumn,
Of all the seasons, is my favourite one.
I am no vainglorious lover: truth to tell,
My love of it has something whimsical.

VI

How can I explain? It has for me
Something of the quality you'll find
In a consumptive girl; condemned to die,
The poor thing wanes, meekly, without complaint.
On her thin lips a smile is visible
She is unconscious of the yawning ground;
Her wasted face is shot with hectic tone.
Alive today, tomorrow she is gone.

VII

Season of melancholy! Eye’s enchanter!
How pleasing to me are your farewell hues —
How I love the pomp of fading Nature,
The trees arrayed in gold-vermilion dress,
The fresh wind blowing through their tops and chanting,
The dense and darkly undulating skies,
The sun’s infrequent ray, the early frost,
And grizzled Winter’s lightly murmured threats.

VIII

Every year, when Autumn comes, I flourish;
The Russian cold is good for my well-being;
In forms of daily life I take new relish,
So that sleep duly comes, and duly hunger;
The blood runs through my heart in pleasant rush,
Desires seethe — I am happy again, and young
And full of life — such is my organism
(If you’ll forgive a vulgar prosaism).

IX

My mount is brought; over the open heath
It bears its rider on with flying mane;
Resoundingly beneath each flashing hoof
The cracking ice rings out from solid ground.
The brief day fades, in the forgotten hearth
A fire is burning once again — in turn
It leaps, dies down; in front of it I read
Or lose myself in lengthy spells of thought.

X

And I forget the world, and in sweet peace
I find myself sweetly lulled by imagination;
And now the muse of poetry appears:
My soul is caught in lyrical confusion,
It trembles, sounds, and seeks, as if in dream,
And overflows in unrestrained expression —
And I am visited by unseen guests,
Acquaintance from oblivion, fancy’s fruits.

XI

Into my mind ambitious thoughts come swarming,
And rhymes race out to meet them on the way,
My fingers reach for a pen, the pen for paper,
And in a moment, verses freely flow.
So a ship sleeps, immobile in the water,
Till suddenly, forward run the sailors — high
And low they clamber — wind fills out the sails;
The giant moves, and soon she cleaves the waves.

XII

She sails. But where are we to sail? ...
