Pan Tadeusz

[Book IV, excerpt ‘Diplomacy and Hunting’]

Who has explored the innermost recess
 Within the Lithuanian wilderness? 
The fisherman knows but the ocean shore,
 The huntsman skirts the forests and no more,
 And only sees their face, the outward part,
 Nor knows the secret mysteries of their heart;
 What happens there to fable’s only known. 
For when you pass the thickets undergrown,
 You find a wall of stumps and roots and logs,
 Defended by a thousand streams and bogs,
 And ant-hills and a net of tangled brakes,
 And hornets’ nests and wasps’, and coiling snakes. 
All these by superhuman courage passed,
 You meet with peril greater yet at last. 
At every step like dens of wolves amid
 The overgrowing grass small pools lie hid,
 So deep that none their bottom ever found. 
(It’s probable that devils there abound.) 
Their water with a rusty bloodstain gleams,
 From which a filthy stinking vapour steams;
 And round about, the stunted, worm-like trees
 Are reft of leaves and bark by foul disease. 
With branches tangled up in mossy knots,
 And hump-backed trunks and beards of fungus clots
 They sit around the waters like a crew
 Of witches huddled round a corpse’s brew. 
Beyond these pools it were in vain to try
 To penetrate on foot or e’en with eye. 
For from the quaking bog misty pall
 Of vapour rises and envelopes all. 
Beyond this vapour (fables so declare),
 A region stretches fertile and most fair. 
The capital of beasts and plants is there. 
There seeds of every tree and herb are pent,
 And thence their species o’er the world are sent;
 And, as in Noah’s ark, one pair at least
 Is kept for breeding there of every beast. 
Midmost the emperors of the forest hold
 Their court, the Bison, Bear, and Buffalo old. 
And in the trees like ministers on guard
 Lie greedy Wolverine and fleet-foot Pard,
 While further off like chiefs inferior
 Dwell Wolf and long-horned Elk and forest Boar. 
The Eagles overhead and soaring Kites
 Live off their lords like courtly parasites. 
These patriarchs, these archetypal pairs
 Of beasts, live in their secret forest lairs,
 And send their children to the world outside
 As colonists, while they in peace abide. 
They perish not by wound of gun or knife,
 But meet a natural end to their long life. 
They have their graveyard too, where near to death
 Birds shed their feathers, beasts their fur bequeath. 
The bear with blunted teeth that cannot eat,
 The senile stag that scarcely lifts his feet,
 The aged hare whose blood more stiffly flows,
 The raven grey, the falcon blind that grows,
 The eagle whose old beak with age grown bent
 No longer serves to give him nourishment,
 The sick or wounded, e’en the lesser kind,
 Return to their own land a grave to find. 
Wherefore it is that on man-trodden ground
 The bones of animals are never found. 
They say the beasts in this metropolis
 Do rule themselves and thence good order is;
 No civilising human custom spoils,
 No law of property their world embroils;
 They know no duels nor in battles strive. 
In their ancestral paradise they live,
 The wild beast with the tame lives as a brother,
 Nor either ever bites or butts the other. 
E’en though a man should go there all unarmed,
 He would pass through the midst of them unharmed,
 And they would see him with such admiration
 As on the last, the sixth day of creation,
 Their fathers that in Eden first did dwell
 On Adam looked, ere strife with him befell. 
But happily in this domain none strays,
 For Toil and Death and Terror bar the ways. 
But sometimes in hot chase the furious dogs
 Incautious enter these deep mossy bogs,
 And horror-stricken when they see their error,
 They run off whining and with looks of terror,
 And even by their master’s hand caressed
 They tremble at his feet by fright possessed. 
The secret places of this capital
 The huntsmen motherlands are wont to call. 

O foolish bear! If you had never strayed
 Beyond the woods, you had not been betrayed;
 But by the fragrance of the honey drawn
 Or too great longing for the ripening corn,
 You left the forest where the trees grew thin,
 And so the woodman traced where you had been. 
At once like cunning spies the beaters sped
 To find where you had spent the night and fed. 
So now the Seneschal and all the beat
 Drew out their lines and cut off your retreat. 
