The Task

[Book IV, ll. 267 – 332: ‘The Winter Evening’]

Just when our drawing-rooms begin to blaze
 With lights, by clear reflection multiplied
 From many a mirror – in which he of Gath,
 Goliath, might have seen his giant bulk
 Whole, without stooping, towering crest and all –
 My pleasures, too, begin. But me perhaps,
 The glowing hearth may satisfy awhile
 With faint illumination, that uplifts
 The shadow to the ceiling, there by fits
 Dancing uncouthly to the quivering flame. 
Not undelightful is an hour to me
 So spent in parlour-twilight: such a gloom
 Suits well the thoughtful or unthinking mind,
 The mind contemplative, with some new theme
 Pregnant, or indisposed alike to all. 
Laugh ye, who boast your more mercurial powers –
 That never feel a stupor, know no pause,
 Nor need one – I am conscious, and confess,
 Fearless, a soul that does not always think. 

Me oft has fancy, ludicrous and wild,
 Soothed with a waking dream of houses, towers,
 Trees, churches, and strange visages, expressed
 In the red cinders, while with poring eye
 I gazed, myself creating what I saw. 
Nor less amused have I quiescent watched
 The sooty films that play upon the bars,
 Pendulous, and foreboding, in the view
 Of superstition – prophesying still,
 Though still deceived – some stranger’s near approach. 
’Tis thus the understanding takes repose
 In indolent vacuity of thought,
 And sleeps and is refreshed. Meanwhile the face
 Conceals the mood lethargic with a mask
 Of deep deliberation, as the man
 Were tasked to his full strength, absorbed and lost. 
Thus oft, reclined at ease, I lose an hour
 At evening, till at length the freezing blast,
 That sweeps the bolted shutter, summons home
 The recollected powers, and, snapping short
 The glassy threads with which the fancy weaves
 Her brittle toys, restores me to myself. 
How calm is my recess – and how the frost,
 Raging abroad, and the rough wind, endear
 The silence and the warmth within! 

I saw the woods and fields, at close of day,
 A variegated show: the meadows green,
 Though faded; and the lands where lately waved
 The golden harvest, of a mellow brown,
 Upturned so lately by the forceful share. 
I saw far off the weedy fallows smile
 With verdure not unprofitable, grazed
 By flocks, fast feeding and selecting each
 His favourite herb – while all the leafless groves
 That skirt the horizon wore a sable hue,
 Scarce noticed in the kindred dusk of eve. 
Tomorrow brings a change, a total change! 
Which even now – though silently performed,
 And slowly, and by most unfelt – the face
 Of universal Nature undergoes. 
Fast falls a fleecy shower: the downy flakes,
 Descending, and with never-ceasing lapse
 Softly alighting upon all below,
 Assimilate all objects. Earth receives
 Gladly the thickening mantle, and the green
 And tender blade that feared the chilling blast
 Escapes unhurt beneath so warm a veil. 
