The Leech-Gatherer

There was a roaring in the wind all night,
 The rain came heavily and fell in floods,
 But now the sun is rising calm and bright,
 The birds are singing in the distant woods,
 Over his own sweet voice the stock-dove broods,
 The jay makes answer as the magpie chatters,
 And all the air is filled with pleasant noise of waters. 

All things that love the sun are out of doors,
 The sky rejoices in the morning’s birth,
 The grass is bright with raindrops; on the moors
 The hare is running races in her mirth,
 And with her feet she from the plashy earth
 Raises a mist which, glittering in the sun,
 Runs with her all the way, wherever she doth run. 

I was a traveller then upon the moor:
 I saw the hare that raced about with joy,
 I heard the woods and distant waters roar –
 Or heard them not – as happy as a boy;
 The pleasant season did my heart employ;
 My old remembrances went from me wholly,
 And all the ways of men, so vain and melancholy. 

But, as it sometimes chanceth – from the might
 Of joy in minds that can no farther go –
 As high as we have mounted in delight
 In our dejection do we sink as low. 
To me that morning did it happen so,
 And fears and fancies thick upon me came:
 Dim sadness, and blind thoughts I knew not, nor could name. 

I heard the skylark singing in the sky
 And I bethought me of the playful hare:
 ‘Even such a happy child of earth am I –
 Even as these blissful creatures do I fare! 
Far from the world I walk, and from all care;
 But there may come another day to me
 Solitude, pain of heart, distress and poverty. 

My whole life have I lived in pleasant thought
 As if life’s business were a summer mood,
 As if all needful things would come unsought
 To genial faith, still rich in genial good –
 But how can he expect that others should
 Build for him, sow for him, and at his call
 Love him, who for himself will take no heed at all?’ 

I thought of Chatterton – the marvellous boy,
 The sleepless soul that perished in its pride –
 Of him who walked in glory and in joy
 Behind his plough upon the mountain’s side. 
By our own spirits are we deified! 
We poets in our youth begin in gladness,
 But thereof comes in the end despondency and madness. 

Now, whether it were by peculiar grace
 (A leading from above, a something given),
 Yet it befell that in this lonely place
 When up and down my fancy thus was driven,
 And I with these untoward thoughts had striven,
 I saw a man before me unawares;
 The oldest man he seemed that ever wore grey hairs. 

My course I stopped as soon as I espied
 The old man in that naked wilderness;
 Close by a pond – upon the further side –
 He stood alone a minute’s space, I guess. 
I watched him, he continuing motionless;
 To the pool’s further margin then I drew,
 He being all the while before me full in view. 

As a huge stone is sometimes seen to lie
 Couched on the bald top of an eminence
 (Wonder to all who do the same espy
 By what means it could thither come, and whence)
 So that it seems a thing endued with sense,
 Like a sea-beast crawled forth, which on a shelf
 Of rock or sand reposeth, there to sun itself –

Such seemed this man, not all alive nor dead,
 Nor all asleep, in his extreme old age. 
His body was bent double, feet and head
 Coming together in their pilgrimage
 As if some dire constraint of pain, or rage
 Of sickness, felt by him in times long past,
 A more than human weight upon his frame had cast. 

Himself he propped – his body, limbs, and face –
 Upon a long grey staff of shaven wood;
 And still, as I drew near with gentle pace,
 Beside the little pond or moorish flood
 Motionless as a cloud the old man stood,
 That heareth not the loud winds when they call,
 And moveth altogether, if it move at all. 

At length – himself unsettling – he the pond
 Stirred with his staff, and fixedly did look
 Upon the muddy water which he conned
 As if he had been reading in a book;
 And now such freedom as I could I took
 And, drawing to his side, to him did say,
 ‘This morning gives us promise of a glorious day.’ 

A gentle answer did the old man make
 In courteous speech which forth he slowly drew,
 And him with further words I thus bespake:
 What kind of work is that which you pursue? –
 This is a lonesome place for one like you.’ 
He answered me with pleasure and surprise,
 And there was, while he spake, a fire about his eyes. 

His words came feebly from a feeble chest,
 Yet each in solemn order followed each
 With something of a lofty utterance dressed –
 Choice word and measured phrase, above the reach
 Of ordinary men – a stately speech
 Such as grave livers do in Scotland use,
 Religious men, who give to God and man their dues. 

He told me that he to this pond had come
 To gather leeches, being old and poor
 (Employment hazardous and wearisome!) 
And he had many hardships to endure. 
From pond to pond he roamed, from moor to moor,
 Housing, with God’s good help, by choice or chance;
 And in this way he gained an honest maintenance. 

The old man still stood talking at my side,
 But now his voice to me was like a stream
 Scarce heard – nor word from word could I divide –
 And the whole body of the man did seem
 Like one whom I had met with in a dream,
 Or like a man from some far region sent
 To give me human strength, and strong admonishment. 

My former thoughts returned: the fear that kills,
 The hope that is unwilling to be fed –
 Cold, pain, and labour, and all fleshly ills,
 And mighty poets in their misery dead. 
And now, not knowing what the old man had said,
 My question eagerly did I renew:
 ‘How is it that you live, and what is it you do?’ 

He with a smile did then his words repeat,
 And said that, gathering leeches far and wide
 He travelled, stirring thus about his feet
 The waters of the ponds where they abide:
 ‘Once I could meet with them on every side,
 But they have dwindled long by slow decay;
 Yet still I persevere, and find them where I may.’ 

While he was talking thus, the lonely place,
 The old man’s shape and speech, all troubled me;
 In my mind’s eye I seemed to see him pace
 About the weary moors continually,
 Wandering about alone and silently. 
While I these thoughts within myself pursued,
 He, having made a pause, the same discourse renewed,

And soon with this he other matter blended –
 Cheerfully uttered, with demeanour kind,
 But stately in the main – and when he ended
 I could have laughed myself to scorn to find
 In that decrepit man so firm a mind. 
‘God’, said I, ‘be my help and stay secure,
 I’ll think of the leech-gatherer on the lonely moor!’ 
