Slavery: A Poem

[Ll. 67-82, 95-124, 211-226]

No; they have heads to think, and hearts to feel,
 And souls to act, with firm though erring zeal;
 For they have keen affections, kind desires,
 Love strong as death, and active patriot fires;
 All the rude energy, the fervid flame
 Of high-souled passion and ingenuous shame –
 Strong but luxuriant virtues boldly shoot
 From the wild vigour of a savage root! 

Nor weak their sense of honour’s proud control
 (For pride is virtue in a pagan soul):
 A sense of worth, a conscience of desert,
 A high, unbroken haughtiness of heart –
 That self-same stuff which erst proud empires swayed,
 Of which the conquerors of the world were made. 
Capricious fate of man! That very pride
 In Afric scourged, in Rome was deified. 

Whene’er to Afric’s shores I turn my eyes,
 Horrors of deepest, deadliest guilt arise:
 I see (by more than fancy’s mirror shown)
 The burning village and the blazing town –
 See the dire victim torn from social life,
 The shrieking babe, the agonizing wife! 
She, wretch forlorn, is dragged by hostile hands,
 To distant tyrants sold, in distant lands! 
Transmitted miseries and successive chains
 The sole sad heritage her child obtains! 
Even this last wretched boon their foes deny:
 To weep together, or together die. 
By felon hands, by one relentless stroke,
 See the fond links of feeling nature broke! 
The fibres twisting round a parent’s heart,
 Torn from their grasp, and bleeding as they part. 
Hold, murderers, hold! Nor aggravate distress –
 Respect the passions you yourselves possess –
 Even you, of ruffian heart and ruthless hand,
 Love your own offspring, love your native land. 
Ah, leave them holy Freedom’s cheering smile,
 The Heaven-taught fondness for the parent soil! 
Revere affections mingled with our frame –
 In every nature, every clime the same! 
In all, these feelings equal sway maintain,
 In all, the love of home and freedom reign,
 And Tempe’s vale and parched Angola’s sand
 One equal fondness of their sons command. 
The unconquered savage laughs at pain and toil,
 Basking in Freedom’s beams which gild his native soil. 

And thou, white savage, whether lust of gold
 Or lust of conquest ruled thee uncontrolled –
 Hero or robber – by whatever name
 Thou plead thy impious claim to wealth or fame:

Whether inferior mischiefs be thy boast
 (A petty tyrant rifling Gambia’s coast),
 Or bolder carnage track thy crimson way
 (Kings dispossessed, and provinces thy prey),
 Panting to tame wide Earth’s remotest bound –
 All Cortez murdered, all Columbus found –
 O’er plundered realms to reign, detested lord,
 Make millions wretched, and thyself abhorred;
 In reason’s eye, in wisdom’s fair account,
 Your sum of glory boasts a like amount –
 The means may differ, but the end’s the same:
 Conquest is pillage with a nobler name! 
