Poetical Meditations

[‘Isolation’]

On the mountain, in the old oak’s domain,
 Often at dusk I sadly take my seat,
 And glance haphazardly across the plain
 Whose varied scene unfolds beneath my feet. 
Here growls the river with its frothy surge:
 It winds far off, and vanishes from view;
 There the calm lake extends its sleeping verge
 Where evening’s star arises in the blue. 
On these dark woods crowning the mountains’ height
 Twilight is sending out its final ray,
 While the blurred chariot of the queen of night
 Rises, and pales the skyline far away. 
Meanwhile the ringing of a Gothic bell
 Casts a religious sound across the breeze;
 The traveller pauses, and the rustic knell
 With day’s last noise blends sacred harmonies. 
Yet my soul, unmoved by this pleasant view,
 Feels neither charmed with it nor comforted;
 I see the earth as wandering spirits do:
 The sun of the living never warms the dead. 
Vainly from hill to hill, look where I may,
 From south to north, from dawn to dusk, I stare;
 I scan the whole of the vast realm, and say:
 ‘There is no happiness for me anywhere.’ 
What are these vales, towers, cottages to me? 
Vain things, whose charm for me has long abated;
 Streams, rocks, woods – places loved and solitary –
 One creature goes ... all is depopulated. 
Whether the passing sun may set or rise,
 With an indifferent eye I watch its way;
 It comes or goes, through clear or cloudy skies –
 No matter! I have no hope any day. 
If I could follow it throughout its flights,
 Everywhere I should see voids, wastes, and worse;
 I care for none of all the things it lights,
 I ask for nothing of the universe. 
Yet perhaps past the boundaries of its sphere,
 Where the true Sun enlightens other skies,
 If I could leave my trappings on earth here,
 What I have dreamed might stand before my eyes. 
Filled at the fountain to which I aspire,
 There I might find both hope and love once more –
 The ideal goodness that all souls desire,
 Which never can be named on this world’s shore! 
O that, within Dawn’s chariot, I were sent
 To the dim object of my longings there! 
Why linger in the land of banishment? 
The earth and I have nothing that we share. 
When forest leaves fall in the open waste,
 The night wind, rising, blows them from the vales;
 And I am such a leaf, dry and debased:
 Sweep me away like them, you stormy gales! 
