The Heath-Man

“Go children, shun the quarry’s depths,
The sun is setting, weaker hums
The bee’s flight now, befogged in sleep,
An ashen cloth floats on the deep,
The heath-man comes.”

Along the bank the boys play on,
They pluck at grass stems, skip a stone,
They paddle at the water’s edge,
Catch dragonflies above the bog
And watch with joy the water spinner
Long-legged flee into the sedge.

“You children, don’t lie in the grass! —
Look, where just now the bee flew past,
How steaming mist engulfs the bells.
The hare peers shyly from the bush,
The heath-man swells!”

The reed scarce lifts its heavy head
Above the fog, the beetle sneaks
Into its hole, and on the stalk
The torpid moth yet higher creeps,
To flee before the humid smoke
That rises underneath its wings.

“You children, stay here close to home!
Don’t go beyond the quarry’s edge;
See how grey the thombush grows,
The song thrush groans upon its nest,
The heath-man brews!” —

You see the herdsman’s pipe now glowing,
Ahead of him his herd is flowing,
As Proteus homeward drives his flock
Of seals across the greying waves.
The swallows twitter round the eaves,
And melancholy crows the cock.

“You children, stay close by the house!
See how the damp flat band of mist
About the garden gate-latch twines;
A false light floats now in the depths,
The heath-man climbs!” —

Now just the pine trees’ highest tips
Protrude green summits from the mist,
Like junipers above the snow;
A gentle bubbling swells the moor,
A feeble whine, a sighing hiss
From out the hollow surges forth.

“You children, come, come quickly in!
The Jack-o’-lantem lights his lamp,
The toad puffs up, snake in the fen;
It’s eerie now to be abroad,
The heath'tnan walks!

The topmost needle sinks, the spruce
Dissolves in smoke, the fog-sprites come,
Upwelling slowly from the moor,
Then glide away on giant limbs;
A mad light flickers in the sedge,
The toads strike up at water’s edge.

And now a feeble glowing seems
To penetrate the giant’s limbs;
It boils up, it tints the waves,
The north, the north bursts into flame —
Arrows burning, fire-spears fly,
Horizon all a lava stream!

“God save us! how it flares and booms,
And sulphur burns atop the dunes!
g children, fold your hands and pray,
That brings us plague and troubled times —
The heath-man’s ablaze!”
