The Poet's Death

The poet is dead, a slave to honor,
A sacrifice to slander, — dead!
With a cry of vengeance on his lips,
He bowed at last his kingly head.
His spirit could no longer bear
Dishonor, infamy, and pain;
Alone he rose once more against
A hostile world, but now he's slain.
Slain! Of what use your grief and tears,
Your barren praise beside his tomb,
Your cringing words of vindication,
When destiny has sealed his doom?
You hounded him and long had stifled
His free and wondrous song and fame!
You fanned, for pleasure and amusement,
His silent passions to a flame!
Rejoice outright! Before the final
Sorrow his head he would not bow:
Now dark the light divine, and faded
The crown of glory on his brow.

The ruthless slayer dealt his blow
With cold and calculated aim;
His heart was blind, his hand was steady,
And straight the cruel path of flame.
Why stare in wonder, why bewildered?
An adventurer of an alien race,
He came, like other greedy seekers,
After fortune and official place.
What cared he for our speech and glory,
The faith and honor of our land?
How could he know, the blind despiser,
Against whom in hate he raised his hand?

Oh, slain! Our glory is no more!
Like the slain hero of his story dear
To us, the prey of jealous fear,
The youth he sang in verses full and clear,
Our poet is no more! ...

Why did he leave the quiet ways of friendship plain?
Why did he seek a world where envy and disdain
The mind and heart impassioned overthrow?
Why did he clasp the hands of slanderers so base,
Believe their lying words, their false embrace,
He whom from youth had learned mankind to know?

They took the poef s crown away; a wreath
Of thorn and laurel on him they laid, and now
Its hidden spines with cruel sting
Have seared his lofty brow ....
Designing whisperers and crafty tongues
Maddened his days, and filled with hate his rest.
And thus he died, athirst with vain revenge,
With hopes defeated in his warring breast.
The sounds of song divine are still,
Never on earth again to peal:
The Singer's bed is dark and chill;
Upon his lips, the twilight seal ....

But you, the spawn of worldly pride,
Breed of corruption, infamy, and shame,
And you, who crush with servile heel
The remnants of the lowly name, —
Hangmen of freedom, glory, thought,
A greedy pack who swarm around the throne, —
You hide behind the shadow of the law,
And mock at right and justice overthrown!
But God is just! A mighty judge, our God,
O men of crime! He waits!
The clink of gold will not avail!
He knows your infamies and hates!
Your slander then will help no more,
Nor will the sullen flood
Of your black gore then wash away
The poefis righteous blood!
