The Spring Festival

Not into the ocean of all the worlds
Will I plunge, nor hover
Where the first created ones, the jubilant choir of the sons of light,
Adore, deeply adore! and die in ecstasy!

Only over the drop on the bucket,
Only over the earth will I hover, and adore!
Hallelujah! Hallelujah! The drop on the bucket
Ran out from the hand of the Almighty too!

When from the hand of the Almighty
The greater earths sprang forth,
The streams of lights rushed out, and the Seven Stars arose,
Then you ran out, Drop, from the hand of the Almighty!

When a stream of lights rushed out, and our sun arose,
And a wavesurge plunged as from a rock
Up to the sky and girdled Orion,
Then you ran out, Drop, from the hand of the Almighty!

Who are the thousands of thousands, who all the myriads,
That dwell in the drop, and dwelled? and who am I?
Hallelujah to the Creator! greater than the earths that arose!
Greater than the Seven Stars, that streamed from the rays together! —

But you, little Worm of spring,
That greenly golden play by me,
You live; and you are, alas,
Not perhaps immortal.

I came out to adore,
And I complain? Forgive, forgive
These tears for mortal things,
O You who will always be!

You will answer all my doubts,
O You who will lead me through
The dark valley of death! I then will learn
If the little golden worm had a soul.

If you are only dust given form,
Son of May, then may you become
Dust blown away again,
Or whatever the Eternal wills.

Once more, my eye, you pour out
Tears of joy!
You, my harp,
Praise the Lord!

My harp is wreathed about,
Wreathed again with palms! I sing to the Lord!
Here I stand. Round about me
Is all omnipotence! And all wonder!

With deep reverence I look upon the Creation,
For You!
You, Nameless One!
Created it!

Breezes blowing round me, with gentle coolness
Breathing on my glowing brow,
You, wonderful breezes,
Were sent by the Lord, the Infinite One!

But now they grow still, they hardly breathe.
The morning sun grows sultry!
Clouds stream upward!
He is manifest, who comes, the Eternal One!

Now the winds lift, they rush, they swirl!
How the forest bends over! How the torrent rises!
Manifest, as far as You can be to mortals,
Yea, manifest are You, Infinite One!

The forest bows down, the torrent flees, and I,
Shall I not fall upon my face?
Lord! Lord! God! merciful and gracious!
You Near One! take pity on me!

Are you angry, Lord?
When night is your garment?
This night is a blessing on the earth.
Father, You are not angry!

It comes, pouring out refreshment
On the nourishing grain!
On the heart-rejoicing grape!
Father, You are not angry!

All is quiet now before You, Near One!
AU is quiet everywhere around!
And the little worm, covered with gold, feels it!
Is it perhaps not soulless, is it immortal?

Ah, may I praise you, Lord, as I long to!
Ever more splendid You reveal yourself!
Ever darker grows the night around You,
And full of blessing!

Do you see the witness of the Near One, the flashing ray?
Do you hear Jehovah’s thunder?
Do you hear it, do you hear it,
The shuddering thunder of the Lord?

Lord! Lord! God!
Merciful and gracious!
Revered and praised
Be your splendid name!

And the stormwinds? they bear the thunder.
How they roar! how with a loud surge they race through the wood!
And now they fall silent. Slowly wander
The black clouds.

Do you see the new witness of the Near One, the flying ray?
Do you hear high in the sky the thunder of the Lord?
It shouts: Jehovah! Jehovah!
And the shattered wood steams!

But not our cottage!
Our Father charged
His destroyer
To pass over our cottage! wo

Ah, now, even now, heaven and earth
Resound with gracious rain!
Now the earth — how it thirsted! — is refreshed,
And Heaven has released its fullness of blessing.

See, now Jehovah comes no more in a storm.
In a quiet whisper now
Jehovah comes,
And beneath him bends the bow of peace!
