The Prelude

[Book VI. ‘Cambridge and the Alps’, ll. 352 – 369, 380 – 413 (‘Golden Hours’: Calais and the Rhone, July 1790)]

’Twas a time when Europe was rejoiced,
 France standing on the top of golden hours,
 And human nature seeming born again. 
Bound, as I said, to the Alps, it was our lot
 To land at Calais on the very eve
 Of that great Federal Day; and there we saw,
 In a mean city and among a few,
 How bright a face is worn when joy of one
 Is joy of tens of millions! 
Southward thence
 We took our way, direct through hamlets, towns,
 Gaudy with relics of that festival,
 Flowers left to wither on triumphal arcs
 And window-garlands. On the public roads
 And once three days successively through paths
 By which our toilsome journey was abridged)
 Among sequestered villages we walked,
 And found benevolence and blessedness
 Spread like a fragrance everywhere. 
Unhoused beneath the evening star we saw
 Dances of liberty, and in late hours
 Of darkness, dances in the open air. 
Among the vine-clad hills of Burgundy,
 Upon the bosom of the gentle Soane
 We glided forward with the flowing stream. 
Swift Rhone, thou wert the wings on which we cut
 Between thy lofty rocks! Enchanting show
 Those woods and farms and orchards did present,
 And single cottages and lurking towns –
 Reach after reach, procession without end
 Of deep and stately vales. A lonely pair
 Of Englishmen we were, and sailed along
 Clustered together with a merry crowd
 Of those emancipated, with a host
 Of travellers, chiefly delegates returning
 From the great spousals newly solemnized
 In their chief city, in the sight of Heaven. 
Like bees they swarmed – gaudy and gay as bees! 
Some vapoured in the unruliness of joy,
 And flourished with their swords as if to fight
 The saucy air! In this blithe company
 We landed, took with them our evening meal,
 Guests welcome almost as the angels were
 To Abraham of old. The supper done,
 With flowing cups elate, and happy thoughts,
 We rose at signal given, and formed a ring
 And hand in hand danced round and round the board. 
All hearts were open, every tongue was loud
 With amity and glee. We bore a name
 Honoured in France, the name of Englishmen,
 And hospitably did they give us hail
 As their forerunners in a glorious course –
 And round and round the board they danced again! 
