The German’s Song

O holy heart of peoples, O Fatherland!
All-suffering, like silent Mother Earth,
And all-unrecognized, though from your depths
Foreigners have taken their best things!

They harvest your thought and your spirit from you,
They eagerly pluck your grapes, and yet they sneer
At you, shapeless vine! that you run wild,
Wandering and staggering on the soil.

O land of higher and more earnest genius!
O land of love! Though I am one of yours,
I have wept and raged that you deny
In foolishness your very soul.

Yet your many beauties you cannot conceal;
Amidst your breezes on a bright mountain range
I have often seen you while looking down
On your lovely greenness, your broad garden.

I have walked along your streams and thought of you,
While the bashful nightingale sang its music
On a swaying willow, while the waves
Lingered quietly on the twilit ground.

And on the shores I have seen cities flourish,
The noble ones, where in the workshop labor
Is silent, and knowledge, where your gentle sun
Lights the artist at his serious work.

Do you know Minerva’s children? They early
Chose the olive tree to be their favorite.
It still lives, still rules, the Athenians’
Thoughtful soul, silently among men,

Though Plato’s pious garden no more grows green
By the ancient river, and the poor farmer
Plows over heroes’ ashes, and shyly
On the column mourns the bird of night.

O holy forest! Attica! Did He then
Strike you too, with his fearful lightnings, so soon,
And did they, the flames that brought you life.
Break loose and hasten to the Aether?

Yet, like the springtime, Genius will wander
From land to land. And we? Is there one among
Our youths whose breast does not conceal
A secret sense, a premonition?

Give thanks to German women! They have preserved
For us the kind spirit of god-images,
And every day their clear and gentle peace
Expiates our violent turmoil.

Where are poets now like our old ones, to whom
The God gave it to be pious and joyful,
Where are wise men like the ones we have?
The cold, brave, and incorruptible!

Your nobility I greet, my Fatherland,
With a new name, the ripest fruit of time!
You who are the last and first of all
The Muses, I greet, Urania!

You hang back in silence, but plan a joyful work
That shall bear witness to you, a new formation,
Unique, like you alone, and shall be born
Of love and be as good as you —

Where is your Delos, where your Olympia,
That we all may join the highest festival? —
Yet how can your son, Immortal One,
Guess what you long have had in store for us?
