The Prelude

[Book X. ‘Residence in France and French Revolution’, ll. 24-82 (‘Sleep No More’: Paris, Oct. 1792)]

The state, as if to stamp the final seal
 On her security, and to the world
 Show what she was, a high and fearless soul –
 Or rather in a spirit of thanks to those
 Who had stirred up her slackening faculties
 To a new transition – had assumed with joy
 The body and the venerable name
 Of a republic. Lamentable crimes,
 ’Tis true, had gone before this hour, the work
 Of massacre, in which the senseless sword
 Was prayed to as a judge. But these were past,
 Earth free from them for ever (as was thought),
 Ephemeral monsters, to be seen but once –
 Things that could only show themselves, and die! 
This was the time in which, inflamed with hope,
 To Paris I returned. Again I ranged,
 More eagerly than I had done before,
 Through the wide city – and in progress passed
 The prison where the unhappy monarch lay,
 Associate with his children and his wife
 In bondage, and the Palace, lately stormed
 With roar of canon and a numerous host. 
I crossed (a black and empty area then)
 The Square of the Carroussel, few weeks back
 Heaped up with dead and dying – upon these
 And other sights looking as doth a man
 Upon a volume whose contents he knows
 Are memorable but from him locked up,
 Being written in a tongue he cannot read,
 So that he questions the mute leaves with pain
 And half upbraids their silence. But that night,
 When on my bed I lay, I was most moved
 And felt most deeply in what world I was. 
My room was high and lonely, near the roof
 Of a large mansion or hotel, a spot
 That would have pleased me in more quiet times –
 Nor was it wholly without pleasure then. 
With unextinguished taper I kept watch,
 Reading at intervals. The fear gone by
 Pressed on me almost like a fear to come. 
I thought of those September massacres,
 Divided from me by a little month,
 And felt and touched them, a substantial dread
 (The rest was conjured up from tragic fictions
 And mournful calendars of true history,
 Remembrances and dim admonishments):
 The horse is taught his manage, and the wind
 Of heaven wheels round and treads in his own steps! 
Year follows year, the tide returns again,
 Day follows day: all things have second birth –
 The earthquake is not satisfied at once!’ 
And in such way I wrought upon myself
 Until I seemed to hear a voice that cried
 To the whole city, ‘Sleep no more!’ To this
 Add comments of a calmer mind, from which
 I could not gather full security,
 But at the best it seemed a place of fear
 Unfit for the repose of night,
 Defenceless as a place where tigers roam. 
