One last word ...

One last word — and I leave this book behind;
From now on, it is alien to my mind.
What People say of it, I shall ignore.
Does the spring worry where its waters pour?
And, looking to the future, should I care
Where some autumnal blast of bitter air
With its unsettled wings may sweep along
Both the tree's foliage and the poet’s song?

I am still young. Although across my brow,
Where many hopes and works are budding now,
Day after day my meditation’s plow
Carves one more furrow and one further line,
Still, in this doubtful lifespan that is mine,
I have seen less than thirty summers shine.
Yes, I was born this century; each year
Some wrong goes rushing from my soul in fear,
And nothing now seems honorable to me
Except my sacred land and liberty!

I hate oppression with an ingrained hate;
And when I hear about some foreign state,
Some butchered realm that calls for help and cries
Beneath a murderous king and merciless skies — -
When Greece, by Christian lords, is allocated
To brutal Turks, and dies eviscerated —
When Ireland bleeds to death from crucifixion —
When Germany is torn by ten kings’ jurisdiction —
When Lisbon, once so sparkling and so sweet,
Is strung up, hanged and kicked by Miguel’s feet —
When an Albani governs Cato’s land —
When Naples feeds and sleeps, while, with a brand
Sceptered and deified by shame and menace,
Austria breaks the lion’s wings of Venice —
When an archduke wrings off Modena’s head —
When Dresden struggles in a geriatric’s bed —
When Spain curls up once more and soundly sleeps —
When Belgium’s lion, like an ox that creeps
Across a barren field, has lost all hope
Of even chewing through its muzzle-rope —
When Milan has Vienna overhead —
When frenzied Cossacks ravish the outspread
Body of Warsaw after she is dead,
And, filthying her holy shroud, deprave
The virgin’s corpse laid out upon her grave —
Why then, I curse him in his haunts and hides,
Each king whose horse is bloodied to the sides!
I know the poet is his judge! I know
The angry Muse with fists of steel can go
And seize him on his throne and bind him down,
Pillory-like, fettered by his vile crown,
And, when we might have praised him, turn him free
Branded with verse that future days will see!
The Muse should help those who have no defence.
Then, shunning pretty tunes, calm affluence,
Childhood and home and amorous desire,
I add a bronze cord to my lyre!
