Climbing of Snowdon

[Prelude XIII., ll. 10 – 73]

It was a summer’s night, a close warm night,
 Wan, dull and glaring, with a dripping mist
 Low-hung and thick that covered all the sky
 Half threatening storm and rain; but on we went
 Unchecked, being full of heart and having faith
 In our tried pilot. Little could we see
 Hemmed round on every side with fog and damp,
 And, after ordinary travellers’ chat
 With our conductor, silently we sank
 Each into commerce with his private thoughts. 
Thus did we breast the ascent, and by myself
 Was nothing either seen or heard the while
 Which took me from my musings, save that once
 The shepherd’s cur did to his own great joy
 Unearth a hedgehog in the mountain crags
 Round which he made a barking turbulent. 
This small adventure (for even such it seemed
 In that wild place and at the dead of night)
 Being over and forgotten, on we wound
 In silence as before. 
With forehead bent
 Earthward, as if in opposition set
 Against an enemy, I panted up
 With eager pace, and no less eager thoughts. 
Thus might we wear perhaps an hour away,
 Ascending at loose distance each from each,
 And I, as chanced, the foremost of the band –
 When at my feet the ground appeared to brighten,
 And with a step or two seemed brighter still;
 Nor had I time to ask the cause of this,
 For instantly a light upon the turf
 Fell like a flash! I looked about, and lo,
 The moon stood naked in the heavens at height
 Immense above my head, and on the shore
 I found myself of a huge sea of mist,
 Which meek and silent rested at my feet. 
A hundred hills their dusky backs upheaved
 All over this still ocean; and beyond,
 Far, far beyond, the vapours shot themselves
 In headlands, tongues, and promontory shapes,
 Into the sea – the real sea, that seemed
 To dwindle and give up its majesty,
 Usurped upon as far as sight could reach. 
Meanwhile, the moon looked down upon this show
 In single glory, and we stood, the mist
 Touching our very feet. 
And from the shore
 At distance not the third part of a mile
 Was a blue chasm, a fracture in the vapour,
 A deep and gloomy breathing-place through which
 Mounted the roar of waters, torrents, streams
 Innumerable, roaring with one voice! 
The universal spectacle throughout
 Was shaped for admiration and delight,
 Grand in itself alone, but in that breach
 Through which the homeless voice of waters rose,
 That dark deep thoroughfare, had Nature lodged
 The soul, the imagination of the whole. 

A meditation rose in me that night
 Upon the lonely mountain when the scene
 Had passed away, and it appeared to me
 The perfect image of a mighty mind,
 Of one that feeds upon infinity,
 That is exalted by an underpresence,
 The sense of God, or whatso’er is dim
 Or vast in its own being. 
