Felicia Hemans

No more, no more, oh never more returning
 Will thy beloved presence gladden earth,
 No more wilt thou with sad, yet anxious yearning,
 Cling to those hopes which have no mortal birth. 
Thou art gone from us, and with thee departed
 How many lovely things have vanished too –
 Deep thoughts that, at thy will, to being started,
 And feelings teaching us our own were true! 
Thou hast been round us like a viewless spirit
 Known only by the music on the air:
 The leaf or flowers which thou hast named inherit
 A beauty known but from thy breathing there,
 For thou didst on them fling thy strong emotion –
 The likeness from itself the fond heart gave,
 As planets from afar look down on ocean
 And give their own sweet image to the wave. 

And thou didst bring from foreign lands their treasures:
 As floats thy various melody along,
 We know the softness of Italian measures
 And the grave cadence of Castilian song. 
A general bond of union is the poet:
 By its immortal verse is language known,
 And for the sake of song do others know it –
 One glorious poet makes the world his own! 
And thou, how far thy gentle sway extended
 The heart’s sweet empire over land and sea:
 Many a stranger and far flower was blended
 In the soft wreath that glory bound for thee. 
The echoes of the Susquehanna’s waters
 Paused in the pinewoods words of thine to hear,
 And to the wide Atlantic’s younger daughters
 Thy name was lovely and thy song was dear. 

Was not this purchased all too dearly? Never
 Can fame atone for all that fame hath cost. 
We see the goal, but know not the endeavour,
 Nor what fond hopes have on the way been lost. 
What do we know of the unquiet pillow
 By the worn cheek and tearful eyelid pressed,
 When thoughts chase thoughts like the tumultuous billow
 Whose very light and foam reveals unrest. 
We say the song is sorrowful, but know not
 What may have left that sorrow on the song:
 However mournful words may be, they show not
 The whole extent of wretchedness and wrong. 
They cannot paint the long sad hours past only
 In vain regrets o’er what we feel we are. 
Alas, the kingdom of the lute is lonely –
 Cold is the worship coming from afar! 

Yet what is mind in woman but revealing
 In sweet clear light the hidden world below,
 By quicker fancies and a keener feeling
 Than those around, the cold and careless, know? 
What is to feel such feeling, but to culture
 A soil whence pain will never more depart –
 The fable of Prometheus and the vulture
 Reveals the poet’s and the woman’s heart! 
Unkindly are they judged, unkindly treated
 By careless tongues and by ungenerous words,
 While cruel sneer and hard reproach repeated
 Jar the fine music of the spirit’s chords. 
Wert thou not weary, thou whose soothing numbers
 Gave other lips the joy thine own had not? 
Didst thou not welcome thankfully the slumbers
 Which closed around thy mourning human lot? 

What on this earth could answer thy requiring
 For earnest faith, for love (the deep and true),
 The beautiful, which was thy soul’s desiring
 But only from thyself its being drew! 
How is the warm and loving heart requited
 In this harsh world, where it awhile must dwell,
 Its best affections wronged, betrayed and slighted –
 Such is the doom of those who love too well. 
Better the weary dove should close its pinion,
 Fold up its golden wings and be at peace! 
Enter oh lady that serene dominion
 Where earthly cares and earthly sorrows cease. 
Fame’s troubled hour has cleared, and now, replying,
 A thousand hearts their music ask of thine:
 Sleep, with a light – the lovely and undying –
 Around thy grave! A grave which is a shrine. 
