Home at Grasmere

[Ll. 104-113, 122-128, 171-184, 218-256]

Mine eyes did ne’er
 Rest on a lovely object, nor my mind
 Take pleasure in the midst of happy thoughts,
 But either she whom now I have, who now
 Divides with me this loved abode, was there
 Or not far off. Where’er my footsteps turned,
 Her voice was like a hidden bird that sang;
 The thought of her was like a flash of light
 Or an unseen companionship, a breath
 Or fragrance independent of the wind. 
The boon is absolute: surpassing grace
 To me hath been vouchsafed. Among the bowers
 Of blissful Eden this was neither given,
 Nor could be given – possession of the good
 Which had been sighed for, ancient thought fulfilled,
 And dear imaginations realized
 Up to their highest measure, yea, and more. 
Long is it since we met to part no more,
 Since I and Emma heard each other’s call
 And were companions once again, like birds
 Which by the intruding fowler had been scared –
 Two of a scattered brood that could not bear
 To live in loneliness! ’Tis long since we,
 Remembering much and hoping more, found means
 To walk abreast, though in a narrow path,
 With undivided steps. Our home was sweet –
 Could it be less? If we were forced to change,
 Our home again was sweet; but still – for youth,
 Strong as it seems and bold, is inly weak
 And diffident – the destiny of life
 Remained unfixed. 
Bleak season was it, turbulent and bleak,
 When hitherward we journeyed, and on foot,
 Through bursts of sunshine and through flying snows,
 Paced the long vales. How long they were, and yet
 How fast that length of way was left behind –
 Wensley’s long vale and Sedbergh’s naked heights. 
The frosty wind, as if to make amends
 For its keen breath, was aiding to our course
 And drove us onward like two ships at sea! 
Stern was the face of Nature; we rejoiced
 In that stern countenance, for our souls had there
 A feeling of their strength. The naked trees,
 The icy brooks, as on we passed, appeared
 To question us. ‘Whence come ye? To what end?’ 
They seemed to say. ‘What would ye?’ said the shower,
 ‘Wild wanderers, whither through my dark domain?’ 
The sunbeam said, ‘Be happy’. They were moved –
 All things were moved – they round us as we went,
 We in the midst of them. 
And when the trance
 Came to us as we stood by Hart-Leap Well,
 The intimation of the milder day
 Which is to come, the fairer world than this,
 And raised us up, dejected as we were
 Among the records of that doleful place
 By sorrow for the hunted beast who there
 Had yielded up his breath – the awful trance,
 The vision of humanity and of God
 The mourner, God the sufferer, when the heart
 Of his poor creatures suffers wrongfully –
 Both in the sadness and the joy we found
 A promise and an earnest that we twain,
 A pair seceding from the common world,
 Might in that hallowed spot to which our steps
 Were tending, in that individual nook,
 Might even thus early for ourselves secure,
 And in the midst of these unhappy times,
 A portion of the blessedness which love
 And knowledge will, we trust, hereafter give
 To all the vales of earth and all mankind. 
