Ode to Youth

No heart, no soul, they’re crowds of skeletons,
 O Youth! Bestow upon me wings! 
I’ll rise over the world that’s lifeless
 To heaven’s realm of rare illusions,
 Where rapture creates dream visions,
 Stirs up the flower of freshness,
 And covers it with hope’s golden paintings. 

Let him who is dazed by year’s sway,
 His furrowed brow bending down low,
 Of this world’s sphere only as much know
 As his feeble eyes can survey. 

O Youth! Soar above the earth’s flatness,
 And with the sun’s piercing eye,
 All mankind’s gigantic vastness
 From end to end probe as you fly. 
Look down – where eternal mist darkens
 The region of sloth in chaos afloat:
 That is the earth! 

Look, how above its deathly waters
 A shell-clad mollusk upward stirs,
 It is its own rudder, sailor, and boat;
 Pursuing water creatures of the smaller stock,
 It rises now, now sinks in deep caves:
 Waves do not cling to it, it does not cling to waves;
 Then, like a bubble, bursts on a piece of rock:
 None knew its life, none knows that it no more exists:
 Such are all egoists! 

O Youth! Life’s nectar is sweet whenever
 I share it around with my fellow men:
 Our hearts are nourished by mirth from heaven,
 When a golden thread binds them together. 

Together as one, my young friends! 
In common happiness each man’s goal blends;
 Strong in accord, prudent yet with passion,
 Together as one, my young friends! 
And he is happy who in battle fell,
 If only his body, death-stricken,
 Gave other a rung to Fame’s citadel. 
Together as one, my young friends! 
Although the road is slippery and steep,
 Violence and weakness defend the fortress:
 Let violence with violence meet,
 And let’s learn in youth to struggle with weakness! 

A child in the crib that tore off Hydra’s head,
 In youth will strangle the Centaurs;
 He will from hell wrest out the dead,
 To heaven will go for laurels. 
Reach far beyond the range of your sight,
 Conquer what reason can’t conquer:
 Youth! Strong as an eagle in flight,
 As a thunderbolt is your shoulder. 

So shoulder to shoulder! As with a common chain
 Let us encircle the whole planet! 
Let’s swiftly aim our thoughts at one target
 And spirits into one domain! 
Terrestrial globe, away from your base! 
We will push you onto a new lane,
 Until freed from moldy bark once again,
 You will recall your verdant days. 

As in the regions of chaos and night
 Beset by the strife of elements,
 By one ‘Let there be’ of God’s might
 The world of living things arose;
 The storm blusters, deep water flows,
 And stars throw light upon the heavens. 
In our lands dead night still lies;
 Human desires are still at war;
 But love emits its fire beacon;
 The spirit’s world from chaos will rise:
 Youth will conceive it in its bosom
 And friendship bond it forevermore. 

The numb icecaps suddenly quail,
 So does prejudice that dims light’s radiance. 
O morning star of freedom, hail,
 Behind you the sun of deliverance! 
