The Prelude

[Book XI., ll. 105-144, 282 – 305]

O pleasant exercise of hope and joy! 
For mighty were the auxiliars which then stood
 Upon our side, us who were strong in love! 
Bliss was it in that dawn to be alive,
 But to be young was very Heaven! O times,
 In which the meagre, stale, forbidding ways
 Of custom, law, and statute, took at once
 The attraction of a country in romance! 
When Reason seemed the most to assert her rights
 When most intent on making of herself
 A prime enchantress – to assist the work,
 Which then was going forward in her name! 
Not favoured spots alone, but the whole Earth,
 The beauty wore of promise – that which sets
 (As at some moments might not be unfelt
 Among the bowers of Paradise itself)
 The budding rose above the rose full blown. 
What temper at the prospect did not wake
 To happiness unthought of? The inert
 Were roused, and lively natures rapt away! 
They who had fed their childhood upon dreams,
 The play-fellows of fancy, who had made
 All powers of swiftness, subtilty, and strength
 Their ministers, – who in lordly wise had stirred
 Among the grandest objects of the sense,
 And dealt with whatsoever they found there
 As if they had within some lurking right
 To wield it; – they, too, who of gentle mood
 Had watched all gentle motions, and to these
 Had fitted their own thoughts, schemers more mild,
 And in the region of their peaceful selves; –
 Now was it that ‘both’ found, the meek and lofty
 Did both find, helpers to their hearts’ desire,
 And stuff at hand, plastic as they could wish, –
 Were called upon to exercise their skill,
 Not in Utopia, – subterranean fields, –
 Or some secreted island, Heaven knows where! 
But in the very world, which is the world
 Of all of us, – the place where, in the end,
 We find our happiness, or not at all! 

Share with me, Friend! the wish
 That some dramatic tale, endued with shapes
 Livelier, and flinging out less guarded words
 Than suit the work we fashion, might set forth
 What then I learned, or think I learned, of truth,
 And the errors into which I fell, betrayed
 By present objects, and by reasonings false
 From their beginnings, inasmuch as drawn
 Out of a heart that had been turned aside
 From Nature’s way by outward accidents,
 And which was thus confounded, more and more
 Misguided, and misguiding. So I fared,
 Dragging all precepts, judgments, maxims, creeds,
 Like culprits to the bar; calling the mind,
 Suspiciously, to establish in plain day
 Her titles and her honours; now believing,
 Now disbelieving; endlessly perplexed
 With impulse, motive, right and wrong, the ground
 Of obligation, what the rule and whence
 The sanction; till, demanding formal ‘proof’,
 And seeking it in every thing, I lost
 All feeling of conviction, and, in fine,
 Sick, wearied out with contrarieties,
 Yielded up moral questions in despair. 
