Man.

To Lord Byron.

You, whose true name the world has not yet come to know,
Mysterious spirit, mortal, angel, demon,
Whether a good or an evil genius, Byron,
I love the savage harmony of your poems,
As I love the noise of thunder and of winds
Mingling in the storm with the voice of torrents!
Night is your dwelling place and horror your domain:
The eagle, king of wilderness, thus scorns the plain;
He only cares, like you, for steep and rocky heights
That winter has whitened, that lightning bolts have struck,
For seashores filled with the strewn debris of shipwreck,
For fields all blackened with the remnants of carnage:
And, while the bird that makes a song of its sorrows
Builds at water’s edge its nest among the flowers,
He from Athos’ summits clears the horrible peak,
Hangs his eyrie in its flanks above the abyss,
And there, alone, surrounded by still throbbing limbs,
Spilling down black blood incessantly from the rocks,
Finding greatest pleasure in the cries of his prey,
And soothed by the tempest, he falls asleep in joy.

And you, Byron, fellow of this brigand of the air,
The music you find sweetest is cries of despair.
Evil is your spectacle, and man your victim.
Your eye, like Satan’s, has sounded the abyss,
And your soul, plunging there far from daylight and God
Has bid an eternal farewell to hope.
Like him, reigning among the shades, in dismal songs
Your unconquerable genius bursts forth;
He triumphs, and your voice, to an infernal tune,
Sings a hymn of glory to the evil God.
But what is the use struggling against destiny?
What can rebellious reason do against fàte?
It has, like the eye, but a narrow horizon.
Neither eyes nor reason carries one beyond it:
There everything flees us, is extinguished, erased.
In this strict circle God has appointed your place:
How? Why? Who can know? From his powerful hands
He has brought about the world and human beings,
As he has spread the dust upon our fields,
Or sown the night and the light in the winds;
He knows, it is enough: the universe is his.
And this present day alone is all we have!

Our crime is to be man and to wish to know:
To serve and not to know, that’s the law of our being.
Byron, this word is hard: for a long time I doubted;
But why should we recoil before the truth?
Your claim before God is to be his handiwork,
To feel and to adore your divine slavery;
A feeble atom driven through his ordered world,
To unite your free will with his designs,
Having been conceived by his intelligence,
To glorify him by your mere existence:
That, that is your lot. Ah! far from accusing him,
Rather kiss the yoke you would wish to break;
Come down from the godly rank your pride usurpe,
All is well, all is good, all is great in its place;
In the sight of Him who made immensity
An insect is worth a world; they have cost the same!

But this law, you say, offends your sense of justice;
It looks to your eyes as just a strange caprice,
A snare where reason stumbles at every step.
Acknowledge it, Byron, and do not judge it.
Like you, my reason too abounds in darkness,
And it is not for me to expound the world’s plan.
Let him who made it explain the universe:
The more I sound the abyss, the more I am lost.
Here below, sorrow comes linked to sorrow,
Day succeeds day, and sadness follows sadness.
Finite by nature, infinite in desires,
Man is a fallen god who remembers heaven:
Whether disinherited from ancient glory
He keeps the memory of his lost destiny,
Or the vast profundity of his desires
Forecasts from afar his future greatness.
Flawed or fallen, man is a great mystery.
In the prison of the senses bound to the earth,
A slave, his beating heart feels born for freedom;
Cast down in misery, he hopes for happiness;
He would fathom the world, but his eye is weak;
He would love forever: what he loves is frail!
Every mortal is like the exile from Eden.
When God had banned him from the heavenly garden,
Measuring with one glance the fatal boundaries,
He sat down weeping by the forbidden gates.
He heard from afar in the divine precincts
The harmonious sigh of eternal love,
The language of joy, the angels’ holy concerts,
Who, in the bosom of God, sang hymns of praise;
And, tearing itself with pain from that blessed place,
His eye with grief fell back upon his fallen state.

Woe to him who from the depth of his life’s exile
Hears the music of a world he longs for!
As soon as it tastes the nectar of the ideal
Human nature finds reality repugnant;
It rushes into the womb of possible dreams;
The real is narrow, the possible is immense;
There with its desires the soul builds a home
Where one drinks forever from learning and love;
Where man, in oceans of beauty, and of light,
Though always thirsty, has a thirst he always slakes,
And, basking in intoxicating dreams all night,
No longer knows himself the moment he awakes.
