Stella

I went to sleep that night somewhere close to the sea.
A cold wind woke me up; I broke ppt of my dream /
I opened my eyes and I saw the morning star.
It was-shining in a mild whiteness. From afar
Its flickering, enchanting light seemed infinite.
The wind fled, carrying off agony with it.
The star emerged and transformed the clouds into down
It seemed a living, thinking brightness looking down
On reefs it softened where the rollers broke in curls.
You thought you were looking at a soul through a pearl.
Then it was night again. Shadows reigned and passed by.
A divine smile lit up the entire sky.
A mast, leaning forward, turned to silver in the light.
The ship itself was black, but its sail shimmered white;
The gulls, perched above on a rock, looked out to sea
And up at the star they watched attentively
As though it were some celestial bird made from a spark.
The sea, the people’s image, motioned toward it in the dark
And, blushing all over, watched it blaze down like day
And seemed to be afraid of frightening it away.
An ineffable love poured into the expanse.
The grass was trembling, as if shaking in a trance.
The birds were chattering in the trees. Suddenly
A flower woke up and said: “The star that you see
Is my sister.” And while the dawn was lifting the night’s
Long, pleated veil — I heard a voice come from the light
Which said: “I’m the star that is sent forward first,
She who people think is in the grave I have burst
I have shone on Sinai, I have shone on Taygetos.
I am the gold and fiery pebble God throws
As if with a slingshot, into the void.
I am what’s reborn when a world is destroyed.
Nations of the world, I am impassioned Poetry.
I have blazed on Moses and on Dante Alighieri.
Now the lion Ocean itself is my lover.
I am coming. Awake, faith and courage! It’s the hour,
Thinkers and souls! Sentinels, climb your towers!
Eyelids, open up! And all you pupils, ignite!
Earth, move your furrows; all you sleepers, stand upright!
And life, wake up your noises — for the one who follows me,
The one who is sending me forward in the night,
Is heaven’s giant light, the angel Liberty.”
