Psyche

[Canto I, st. 16 – 32: ‘A Glimpse of Love’]

Mid the blue waves, by circling seas embraced,
 A chosen spot of fairest land was seen,
 For there with favouring hand had Nature placed
 All that could lovely make the varied scene:
 Eternal Spring there spread her mantle green;
 There high surrounding hills deep-wooded rose
 O’er placid lakes; while marble rocks between
 The fragrant shrubs their pointed heads disclose,
 And balmy breathes each gale which o’er the island blows. 

Pleasure had called the fertile lawns her own,
 And thickly strewed them with her choicest flowers;
 Amid the quiet glade her golden throne
 Bright shone with lustre through o’erarching bowers:
 There her fair train, the ever-downy Hours
 Sport on light wing with the young Joys entwined;
 While Hope, delighted, from her full lap showers
 Blossoms, whose fragrance can the ravished mind
 Inebriate with dreams of rapture unconfined. 

And in the grassy centre of the isle,
 Where the thick verdure spreads a damper shade,
 Amid their native rocks concealed awhile,
 Then o’er the plains in devious streams displayed,
 Two gushing fountains rise; and thence conveyed,
 Their waters through the woods and valleys play,
 Visit each green recess and secret glade,
 With still unmingled, still meandering way,
 Nor widely wandering far, can each from other stray. 

But of strange contrast are their virtues found,
 And oft the lady of that isle has tried
 In rocky dens and caverns under ground,
 The black deformed stream in vain to hide –
 Bursting all bounds her labours it defied! 
Yet many a flowery sod its course conceals
 Through plains where deep its silent waters glide,
 Till secret ruin, all corroding, steals,
 And every treacherous arch the hideous gulf reveals. 

Forbidding every kindly prosperous growth,
 Where’er it ran, a channel bleak it wore;
 The gaping banks receded, as though loth
 To touch the poison which disgraced their shore:
 There deadly anguish pours unmixed his store
 Of all the ills which sting the human breast,
 The hopeless tears which past delights deplore,
 Heart-gnawing jealousy which knows no rest,
 And self-upbraiding shame, by stern remorse opprest. 

Oh, how unlike the pure transparent stream
 Which near it bubbles o’er its golden sands! 
The impeding stones with pleasant music seem
 Its progress to detain from other lands;
 And all its banks, enwreathed with flowery bands,
 Ambrosial fragrance shed in grateful dew. 
There young Desire enchanted ever stands,
 Breathing delight and fragrance ever new,
 And bathed in constant joys of fond affection true. 

But not to mortals is it e’er allowed
 To drink unmingled of that current bright. 
Scarce can they taste the pleasurable flood,
 Defiled by angry Fortune’s envious spite,
 Who from the cup of amorous delight
 Dashes the sparkling draught of brilliant joy,
 Till, with dull sorrow’s stream despoiled quite,
 No more it cheers the soul nor charms the eye,
 But mid the poisoned bowl distrust and anguish lie. 

Here Cupid tempers his unerring darts,
 And in the fount of bliss delights to play;
 Here mingles balmy sighs and pleasing smarts,
 And here the honied draught will oft allay
 With that black poison’s all-polluting sway,
 For wretched man. Hither, as Venus willed,
 For Psyche’s punishment he bent his way;
 From either stream his amber vase he filled –
 For her were meant the drops which grief alone distilled. 

His quiver, sparkling bright with gems and gold,
 From his fair plumed shoulder graceful hung,
 And from its top in brilliant chords enrolled,
 Each little vase resplendently was slung. 
Still as he flew, around him sportive clung
 His frolic train of winged zephyrs light,
 Wafting the fragrance which his tresses flung;
 While odours dropped from every ringlet bright,
 And from his blue eyes beamed ineffable delight. 

Wrapt in a cloud unseen by mortal eye,
 He sought the chamber of the royal maid;
 There, lulled by careless soft security,
 Of the impending mischief nought afraid,
 Upon her purple couch was Psyche laid,
 Her radiant eyes a downy slumber sealed;
 In light transparent veil alone arrayed,
 Her bosom’s opening charms were half revealed,
 And scarce the lucid folds her polished limbs concealed. 

A placid smile plays o’er each roseate lip! 
Sweet severed lips, while thus your pearls disclose
 That slumbering thus unconscious she may sip
 The cruel presage of her future woes. 
Lightly, as fall the dews upon the rose,
 Upon the coral gates of that sweet cell
 The fatal drops he pours; nor yet he knows
 (Nor, though a god, can he presaging tell)
 How he himself shall mourn the ills of that sad spell! 

Nor yet content, he from his quiver drew,
 Sharpened with skill divine, a shining dart. 
No need had he for bow, since thus too true
 His hand might wound her all-exposéd heart,
 Yet her fair side he touched with gentlest art,
 And half relenting on her beauties gazed! 
Just then, awaking with a sudden start,
 Her opening eye in humid lustre blazed –
 Unseen he still remained, enchanted and amazed. 

The dart which in his hand now trembling stood,
 As o’er the couch he bent with ravished eye,
 Drew with its daring point celestial blood
 From his smooth neck’s unblemished ivory. 
Heedless of this, but with a pitying sigh
 (The evil done now anxious to repair),
 He shed in haste the balmy drops of joy
 O’er all the silky ringlets of her hair;
 Then stretched his plumes divine, and breathed celestial air. 

Unhappy Psyche! Soon the latent wound
 The fading roses of her cheek confess,
 Her eyes’ bright beams, in swimming sorrows drowned,
 Sparkle no more with life and happiness
 Her parents’ fond exulting heart to bless. 
She shuns adoring crowds, and seeks to hide
 The pining sorrows which her soul oppress,
 Till to her mother’s tears no more denied,
 The secret grief she owns, for which she lingering sighed. 

A dream of mingled terror and delight
 Still heavy hangs upon her troubled soul,
 An angry form still swims before her sight,
 And still the vengeful thunders seem to roll –
 Still crushed to earth she feels the stern control
 Of Venus unrelenting, unappeased. 
The dream returns, she feels the fancied dole:
 Once more the furies on her heart have seized,
 But still she views the youth who all her sufferings eased. 

Of wondrous beauty did the vision seem,
 And in the freshest prime of youthful years –
 Such at the close of her distressful dream
 A graceful champion to her eyes appears! 
Her loved deliverer from her foes and fears
 She seems in grateful transport still to press;
 Still his soft voice sounds in her ravished ears. 
Dissolved in fondest tears of tenderness
 His form she oft invokes her waking eyes to bless. 

Nor was it quite a dream, for as she woke,
 Ere heavenly mists concealed him from her eye,
 One sudden transitory view she took
 Of Love’s most radiant bright divinity. 
From the fair image never can she fly,
 As still consumed with vain desire she pines;
 While her fond parents heave the anxious sigh,
 And to avert her fate seek holy shrines
 The threatened ills to learn by auguries and signs. 
