Enthusiasm

To Greece! To Greece! Farewell to you all! I go!
At last for all this martyred people’s blood
Their butchers’ vile blood will flow!
To Greece, O my friends! Revenge and liberty!
This turban on my head, this sabre at my side.
Saddle my horse and let’s go!

When do we set out? Tonight! Tomorrow is too late.
Give us arms! Horses! A boat for Toulon!
Give us wings instead of sails!
Let’s lead what’s left of our old regiments,
And watch those Ottoman tigers suddenly
Flee with the feet of gazelles!

Command us, Fabvier, like a prince who is prayed for!
You who alone stood at your post where kings failed,
And kept your troops in ready state,
Among new Greeks an ancient Roman’s shade,
Simple and brave soldier, who in your rough hands
Are holding now a people’s fate.

From your long slumber arise, wake up down there,
Rifles of France! And you, music of battles,
Bombs, cannon, cymbals shrill!
Wake up, you horses with thundering footsteps,
Sabres that only lack tempering in blood,
Pistols stuffed with balls that kill!

I want to see the battles from the vanguard,
How the mounted spahis on the tense infantry
Come rushing in a torrent;
And how their Damask, which their charger carries,
Strikes off a head with its crescent’s edge of steel.
Let’s go ...! — but what now, poor poet,

Where is this warlike fury transporting me?
My place I’ll find among old men and children!
I am a spirit one blow will banish.
As a dead leaf escaping from the birches
Floats aslant a wave from stream to stream,
My days from dream to dream all vanish.

Everything makes me dream: air, meadows, mountains, woods.
I have for them each a day of sighs from an oboe,
A day of sounds from rustling leaves;
When twilight comes, in the depth of a dark valley,
I love a large silver lake, a deep and clear glass
Where the clouds behold themselves.

I love a moon red and burning like bright gold
Rising in thick mist, or just as well when white
Beside a cloud’s impending dark;
I love those heavy, black chariots which carry night
With a noise before the thresholds of farmsteads,
And in shadows make dogs bark.
