To Spring, or, Concerning the Ancient Myths

Even though the sun repair
The min of the sky, the western breeze
Quicken the sickly air, frpm whence is fled,
Scattered, the heavy shadow of the clouds,
And though the birds confide
Their undefended bodies to the winds,
The light of day, piercing among the coverts
And loosening the hoar-frost, breed new hope,
Fresh amorous desire among the beasts;
Yet may a thought revisit the retired mind
Of Man, by grief entombed,
Of that fair former age, which all too soon
The obscure splendor of truth
And time’s disasters utterly consumed?
For him, must Phoebus’ beams be dark, and quenched
For all eternity?
And fragrant Spring, shall you not touch once more
And breathe upon this, frozen heart, which age
Embitters in the flowering time of life?

And are you living yet,
O sacred Nature? May our human ears
So long unused, catch that eternal voice?
The brooks were once a home for the white nymphs
Their shelter and their glass
The liquid springs; and the high mountain ridges
To secret dancing of immortal feet
Trembled, and the deep forests (now
The lonely haunt of winds). The shepherd boy
Who sought at noontide the uncertain shade
And led his thirsty lambs
Down to the flowery river’s bank, might hear
Sounding along those banks
The rustic Pan’s shrill song or, struck with wonder,
Gaze on the rippling waters, for unrevealed
The quiver-bearing goddess
Went down to the warm flood, to cleanse away,
After the bloodstained hunt, immodest dust
From off her snowy flank and virgin arms.

The very grass and flowers
And every thicket lived, in former days!
The gentle airs, the clouds, and Titan’s lamp
Were mindful of the race of Man, and then,
O Cyprian star of Venus,
The traveler going through the lonely night
Followed your naked beauty with fixed eyes
Over the hills and shores, and made of you
Companion on his way, and fancied, too,
You cared for mortal men. Others, who fled
The tainted intercourse
Of towns, their shame and tumult, deep in woods
Clasping the rough-boled trees,
Believed that in their bloodless veins there surged
The vital flame, while the leaves breathed, and trembled,
Hid in that sad embrace,
Daphne, or mournful Phyllis, or unconsoled,
Some child of Clymene weeping for him
Who plunged the bright sun in Eridanus.

Nor, you harsh cliffs, on you
Could beat unheeded then the sorrowing voice
Of our distress, while lonely Echo haunted
Your fearful hiding places: not the wind’s
Empty illusion then —
A nymph’s unhappy ghost had dwelling there,
Whom grievous love and fate too harsh had parted
From her soft limbs. And she from the bare shelves,
The caves and desolate places, would proclaim
The not unnoted grief, to the hollow sky
Hurling the broken words
Of our complaint. And legend told-of you,
Musical bird, well-versed
In human deeds, amid the leafy coverts
Singing now Spring is born again, you mourned
To the dark silent air,
In stillness of the fields, your ancient wrongs,
And all the dreadful tale of your revenge
In that wan day when wrath and pity met.

But we can claim no kindred
Now with your race; not human grief informs
Your varied notes; darkling the valley hides you,
Free from all guilt — the lèss belov’d for that.
Alas, alas, for empty
Stand the Olympian halls, and the blind thunder,
Wandering among the hills and the black clouds,
Indifferently dissolves with a cold horror
Guilty or guiltless breast; strange is become
The soil that bore us, 'and knowing not her offspring
Is nurse to the sad soul.
But, O fair Nature, heed our griefs, and this
Destiny undeserved,
And touch my spirit once more with the ancient fire;
This, if indeed you be a living power,
Or if there be in heaven,
On earth beneath the sun, or the sea’s bosom,
One Being, conscious there of our distress,
Spectator of our pain, though pitiless.
