The Wife

Like a tiny dove in its nest, abandoned by its love, the tender wife stands alone awaiting her soul’s beloved, her breast filled with bitterness, her eyes filled with tears. Nothing in the August night disturbs the silence and calm. The town clock has struck twelve some time before, a fearful and sad hour of spectres and phantoms, in which the dead, perhaps, leave their forgotten tombs to visit their lovers, those whom in life they loved. And the sad spectres also wander from their happy deaths through the mind of the wife who, anguished, watches them. One bears in his hand a bunch of white roses, the same as the beloved of her soul gave her when first he swore love and constancy. Another bears the beautiful garland of orange blossom which, the day of theirnuptials, would adorn her pure brow. Yet their flowers no longer have freshness and fragrance and, like the face of the wife, are faded and pale. Only thorns remain of the beautiful bouquet of roses; the wind has borne away the blossoms just as words have been carried away, the oaths of love of the beloved of her soul. Another, cruelly, repeats to her in a loving and languid voice these words: ‘For tender husbands and wives who love one another in delirium, the moments and hours pass as briefly as the dawn; yet, if fickle, the husband, alas o God!, leaves the wife to seek other pleasures like a frivolous butterfly who now disdains the flower which it once anxiously sucked; the hours are slow centuries of torture for the soul. ’ – ‘Flee, cruel memories’, cries the wife in anguish, ‘flee, fateful spectres of my dead hopes’ – But they persecute her the more she rejects them. Of a sudden, oh pleasure!, o happiness!, the noise of steps resounds. ‘It is my dearest love!’, the wife exclaims in a tremulous voice, ‘sad and copious tears flee from my eyes; let a smile shine on my lips and on my face a sweet calm, for it is unjust to receive in lamentation he who is best beloved. Let pleasure glow on my countenance, my heart drink up your tears.’
