France: An Ode

I.

Ye clouds, that far above me float and pause,
 Whose pathless march no mortal may control! 
Ye ocean-waves, that whereso’er ye roll,
 Yield homage only to eternal laws! 
Ye woods, that listen to the night-bird’s singing,
 Midway the smooth and perilous slope reclined,
 Save where your own imperious branches swinging
 Have made a solemn music of the wind,
 Where (like a man beloved of God)
 Through glooms which never woodman trod
 How oft, pursuing fancies holy,
 My moonlight way o’er flowering weeds I wound
 Inspired, beyond the guess of folly,
 By each rude shape and wild unconquerable sound! 
Oh ye loud waves, and oh ye forests high,
 And oh ye clouds that far above me soared –
 Thou rising sun, thou blue rejoicing sky,
 Yea, every thing that is, and will be, free –
 Bear witness for me, whereso’er ye be,
 With what deep worship I have still adored
 The spirit of divinest Liberty! 

II.

When France in wrath her giant-limbs upreared,
 And, with an oath which smote air, earth and sea,
 Stamped her strong foot and said she would be free,
 Bear witness for me how I hoped and feared –
 With what a joy my lofty gratulation
 Unawed I sang, amid a slavish band –
 And when to whelm the disenchanted nation
 (Like fiends embattled by a wizard’s wand)
 The Monarchs marched in evil day,
 And Britain joined the dire array,
 Though dear her shores and circling ocean;
 Though many friendships, many youthful loves,
 Had swoln the patriot emotion
 And flung a magic light o’er all her hills and groves;
 Yet still my voice, unaltered, sang defeat
 To all that braved the tyrant-quelling lance –
 And shame (too long delayed) and vain retreat! 
For ne’er, oh Liberty, with partial aim
 I dimmed thy light or damped thy holy flame,
 But blest the paeans of delivered France,
 And hung my head, and wept at Britain’s name. 

III.

‘And what’, I said, ‘though Blasphemy’s loud scream
 With that sweet music of deliverance strove –
 Though all the fierce and drunken passions wove
 A dance more wild that e’er was maniac’s dream! 
Ye storms that round the dawning East assembled,
 The sun was rising, though ye hid his light!’ 
And when (to soothe my soul, that hoped and trembled)
 The dissonance ceased, and all seemed calm and bright;
 When France her front, deep-scarred and gory,
 Concealed with clustering wreaths of glory;
 When, insupportably advancing,
 Her arm made mockery of the warrior’s ramp;
 While, timid looks of fury glancing,
 Domestic treason (crushed beneath her fatal stamp)
 Writhed like a wounded dragon in his gore;
 Then I reproached my fears that would not flee –
 ‘And soon’, I said, ‘shall Wisdom teach her lore
 In the low huts of them that toil and groan! 
And, conquering by her happiness alone,
 Shall France compel the nations to be free. 
Till Love and Joy look round, and call the Earth their own.’ 

IV.

Forgive me, Freedom – oh forgive those dreams! 
I hear thy voice, I hear thy loud lament,
 From bleak Helvetia’s icy caverns sent –
 I hear thy groans upon her bloodstained streams! 
Heroes, that for thy peaceful country perished –
 And ye that, fleeing, spot your mountain-snows
 With bleeding wounds – forgive me that I cherished
 One thought that ever blest your cruel foes! 
To scatter rage, and traitorous guilt,
 Where Peace her jealous home had built;
 A patriot-race to disinherit
 Of all that made their stormy wilds so dear;
 And with inexpiable spirit

To taint the bloodless freedom of the mountaineer –
 Oh France, that mockest Heaven, adulterous, blind,
 And patriot only in pernicious toils! 
Are these thy boasts, champion of human kind? 
To mix with Kings in the low lust of sway,
 Yell in the hunt, and share the murderous prey,
 To insult the shrine of Liberty with spoils
 From freemen torn – to tempt, and to betray? 

V.

The sensual and the dark rebel in vain,
 Slaves by their own compulsion! In mad game
 They burst their manacles, and wear the name
 Of Freedom graven on a heavier chain! 
Oh Liberty, with profitless endeavour
 Have I pursued thee many a weary hour
 But thou nor swellst the victor’s strain, nor ever
 Didst breathe thy soul in forms of human power. 
Alike, from all, howe’er they praise thee
 (Nor prayer, nor boastful name delays thee) –
 Alike from Priestcraft’s harpy minions
 And factious Blasphemy’s obscener slaves
 Thou speedest on thy subtle pinions,
 The guide of homeless winds, and playmate of the waves! 
And there I felt thee – on the sea-cliff’s verge,
 Whose pines, scarce travelled by the breeze above,
 Had made one murmur with the distant surge. 
Yes, while I stood and gazed, my temples bare,
 And shot my being through earth, sea and air,
 Possessing all things with intensest love,
 Oh Liberty, my spirit found thee there! 
