Beachy Head

[Ll. 346 – 405, 456-505]

An early worshipper at Nature’s shrine,
 I loved her rudest scenes – warrens, and heaths,
 And yellow commons, and birch-shaded hollows,
 And hedgerows bordering unfrequented lanes,
 Bowered with wild roses and the clasping woodbine,
 Where purple tassels of the tangling vetch
 With bittersweet and bryony inweave,
 And the dew fills the silver bindweed’s cups. 
I loved to trace the brooks whose humid banks
 Nourish the harebell and the freckled pagil,
 And stroll among o’ershadowing woods of beech,
 Lending in summer from the heats of noon
 A whispering shade; while haply there reclines
 Some pensive lover of uncultured flowers
 Who, from the tumps with bright green mosses clad,
 Plucks the wood-sorrel with its light thin leaves,
 Heart-shaped and triply-folded, and its root
 Creeping like beaded coral – or who there
 Gathers (the copse’s pride) anemones,
 With rays like golden studs on ivory laid
 Most delicate, but touched with purple clouds,
 Fit crown for April’s fair but changeful brow. 

Ah, hills so early loved! In fancy still
 I breathe your pure keen air and still behold
 Those widely spreading views, mocking alike
 The poet and the painter’s utmost art –
 And still (observing objects more minute)
 Wondering remark the strange and foreign forms
 Of seashells, with the pale calcareous soil
 Mingled, and seeming of resembling substance –
 Though surely the blue ocean (from the heights
 Where the downs westward tend, but dimly seen)
 Here never rolled its surge? Does Nature then
 Mimic, in wanton mood, fantastic shapes
 Of bivalves, and inwreathed volutes, that cling
 To the dark sea-rock of the watery world? 
Or did this range of chalky mountains once
 Form a vast basin, where the ocean-waves
 Swelled fathomless, what time these fossil shells,
 Buoyed on their native element, were thrown
 Among the imbedding calx when the huge hill
 Its giant bulk heaved, and in strange ferment
 Grew up a guardian-barrier ’twixt the sea
 And the green level of the sylvan weald? 

Ah, very vain is Science’ proudest boast,
 And but a little light its flame yet lends
 To its most ardent votaries; since from whence
 These fossil forms are seen is but conjecture,
 Food for vague theories, or vain dispute –
 While to his daily task the peasant goes
 Unheeding such inquiry, with no care
 But that kindly change of sun and shower
 Fit for his toil the earth he cultivates. 
As little recks the herdsman of the hill
 (Who on some turfy knoll, idly reclined,
 Watches his wether-flock) that deep beneath
 Rest the remains of men of whom is left
 No traces in the records of mankind,
 Save what these half-obliterated mounds
 And half-filled trenches doubtfully impart. 

Near where a richer tract of cultured land
 Slopes to the south, and (burnished by the sun)
 Bend in the gale of August floods of corn;
 The guardian of the flock, with watchful care,
 Repels by voice and dog the encroaching sheep –
 While his boy visits every wired trap
 That scars the turf; and from the pit-falls takes
 The timid migrants, who, from distant wilds,
 Warrens and stone-quarries, are destined thus
 To lose their short existence. But unsought
 By Luxury yet, the shepherd still protects
 The social bird, who from his native haunts
 Of willowy current, or the rushy pool,
 Follows the fleecy crowd, and flirts and skims,
 In fellowship among them. 
Where the knoll
 More elevated takes the changeful winds,
 The windmill rears its vanes; and thitherward
 With his white load, the master travelling
 Scares the rooks rising slow on whispering wings,
 While o’er his head (before the summer sun
 Lights up the blue expanse), heard more than seen,
 The lark sings matins, and, above the clouds
 Floating, embathes his spotted breast in dew. 
Beneath the shadow of a gnarled thorn
 Bent by the sea blast, from a seat of turf
 With fairy nosegays strewn, how wide the view! 
Till in the distant north it melts away
 And mingles indiscriminate with clouds –
 But if the eye could reach so far, the mart
 Of England’s capital, its domes and spires,
 Might be perceived! Yet hence the distant range
 Of Kentish hills appear in purple haze,
 And nearer, undulate the wooded heights
 And airy summits that above the mole
 Rise in green beauty, and the beaconed ridge
 Of Black Down shagged with heath, and, swelling rude
 Like a dark island from the vale, its brow
 Catching the last rays of the evening sun
 That gleam between the nearer park’s old oaks,
 Then lighten up the river, and make prominent
 The portal, and the ruined battlements
 Of that dismantled fortress, raised what time
 The Conqueror’s successors fiercely fought,
 Tearing with civil feuds the desolate land. 
But now a tiller of the soil dwells there,
 And of the turret’s looped and raftered halls
 Has made an humbler homestead – where he sees,
 Instead of armed foemen, herds that graze
 Along his yellow meadows, or his flocks
 At evening from the upland driven to fold. 
