Don Juan

[‘Juan and Haidee’, Canto II-IV]

Canto II.

CXI.

How long in his damp trance young Juan lay
 He knew not, for the earth was gone for him,
 And Time had nothing more of night nor day
 For his congealing blood, and senses dim;
 And how this heavy faintness passed away
 He knew not, till each painful pulse and limb,
 And tingling vein, seemed throbbing back to life,
 For Death, though vanquished, still retired with strife. 

CXII.

His eyes he opened, shut, again unclosed,
 For all was doubt and dizziness; he thought
 He still was in the boat, and had but dozed,
 And felt again with his despair o’erwrought,
 And wished it death in which he had reposed,
 And then once more his feelings back were brought,
 And slowly by his swimming eyes was seen
 A lovely female face of seventeen. 

CXIII.

’Twas bending close o’er his, and the small mouth
 Seemed almost prying into his for breath;
 And chafing him, the soft warm hand of youth
 Recalled his answering spirits back from death;
 And, bathing his chill temples, tried to soothe
 Each pulse to animation, till beneath
 Its gentle touch and trembling care, a sigh
 To these kind efforts made a low reply. 

CXIV.

Then was the cordial poured, and mantle flung
 Around his scarce-clad limbs; and the fair arm
 Raised higher the faint head which o’er it hung,
 And her transparent cheek (all pure and warm)
 Pillowed his death-like forehead. Then she wrung
 His dewy curls, long drenched by every storm,
 And watched with eagerness each throb that drew
 A sigh from his heaved bosom – and hers, too. 

CXV.

And lifting him with care into the cave,
 The gentle girl, and her attendant (one
 Young, yet her elder, and of brow less grave,
 And more robust of figure), then begun
 To kindle fire, and as the new flames gave
 Light to the rocks that roofed them, which the sun
 Had never seen, the maid, or whatsoe’er
 She was, appeared distinct, and tall, and fair. 

CXVI.

Her brow was overhung with coins of gold
 That sparkled o’er the auburn of her hair –
 Her clustering hair, whose longer locks were rolled
 In braids behind – and though her stature were
 Even of the highest for a female mould,
 They nearly reached her heel; and in her air
 There was a something which bespoke command,
 As one who was a lady in the land. 

CXXIV.

I’ll tell you who they were, this female pair,
 Lest they should seem princesses in disguise;
 Besides, I hate all mystery, and that air
 Of clap-trap, which your recent poets prize! 
And so, in short, the girls they really were
 They shall appear before your curious eyes –
 Mistress and maid – the first was only daughter
 Of an old man, who lived upon the water. 

CXXV.

A fisherman he had been in his youth,
 And still a sort of fisherman was he;
 But other speculations were, in sooth,
 Added to his connection with the sea,
 Perhaps not so respectable, in truth:
 A little smuggling, and some piracy,
 Left him, at last, the sole of many masters
 Of an ill-gotten million of piastres. 

CXXVI.

A fisher, therefore, was he – though of men,
 Like Peter the Apostle, – and he fished
 For wandering merchant-vessels, now and then,
 And sometimes caught as many as he wished. 
The cargoes he confiscated, and gain
 He sought in the slave-market too, and dished
 Full many a morsel for that Turkish trade,
 By which, no doubt, a good deal may be made. 

CXXVII.

He was a Greek, and on his isle had built
 One of the wild and smaller Cyclades)
 A very handsome house from out his guilt,
 And there he lived exceedingly at ease;
 Heaven knows what cash he got, or blood he spilt –
 A sad old fellow was he, if you please –
 But this I know, it was a spacious building,
 Full of barbaric carving, paint, and gilding. 

CXXVIII.

He had an only daughter, called Haidee,
 The greatest heiress of the Eastern Isles;
 Besides, so very beautiful was she,
 Her dowry was as nothing to her smiles! 
Still in her teens, and like a lovely tree,
 She grew to womanhood, and between whiles
 Rejected several suitors, just to learn
 How to accept a better in his turn. 

CXXIX.

And walking out upon the beach, below
 The cliff, towards sunset, on that day she found,
 Insensible – not dead, but nearly so –
 Don Juan, almost famished, and half drowned;
 But being naked, she was shocked, you know,
 Yet deemed herself in common pity bound,
 As far as in her lay to ‘take him in’ –
 ‘A stranger’ dying, with so white a skin! 

CXXX.

But taking him into her father’s house
 Was not exactly the best way to save,
 But like conveying to the cat the mouse,
 Or people in a trance into their grave;
 Because the good old man had so much nous
 Unlike the honest arab thieves so brave,
 He would have hospitably cured the stranger,
 And sold him instantly when out of danger. 

CXXXI.

And therefore, with her maid, she thought it best –
 A virgin always on her maid relies –
 To place him in the cave for present rest. 
And when, at last, he opened his black eyes
 Their charity increased about their guest,
 And their compassion grew to such a size
 It opened half the turnpike-gates to Heaven
 (St Paul says ’tis the toll which must be given). 

CXXXII.

They made a fire, but such a fire as they
 Upon the moment could contrive with such
 Materials as were cast up round the bay –
 Some broken planks, and oars, that to the touch
 Were nearly tinder, since so long they lay
 A mast was almost crumbled to a crutch –
 But, by God’s grace, here wrecks were in such plenty,
 That there was fuel to have furnished twenty. 

CXXXIII.

He had a bed of furs, and a pelisse,
 For Haidee stripped her sables off to make
 His couch; and, that he might be more at ease,
 And warm, in case by chance he should awake,
 They also gave a petticoat apiece,
 She and her maid, and promised by daybreak
 To pay him a fresh visit, with a dish
 For breakfast, of eggs, coffee, bread, and fish. 

CXXXIV.

And thus they left him to his lone repose:
 Juan slept like a top – or like the dead,
 Who sleep at last, perhaps (God only knows) –
 Just for the present, and in his lulled head
 Not even a vision of his former woes
 Throbbed in accursed dreams, which sometimes spread
 Unwelcome visions of our former years,
 Till the eye, cheated, opens thick with tears. 

CXXXV.

Young Juan slept all dreamless – but the maid
 Who smoothed his pillow, as she left the den
 Looked back upon him, and a moment stayed,
 And turned, believing that he called again. 
He slumbered; yet she thought, at least she said
 (The heart will slip even as the tongue and pen),
 He had pronounced her name-but she forgot
 That at this moment Juan knew it not. 

CXXXVI.

And pensive to her father’s house she went,
 Enjoining silence strict to Zoë, who
 Better than her knew what in fact she meant,
 She being wiser by a year or two –
 A year or two’s an age when rightly spent,
 And Zoë spent hers, as most women do,
 In gaining all that useful sort of knowledge
 Which is acquired in Nature’s good old college. 

CXXXVII.

The morn broke, and found Juan slumbering still
 Fast in his cave, and nothing clashed upon
 His rest; the rushing of the neighbouring rill,
 And the young beams of the excluded sun,
 Troubled him not, and he might sleep his fill;
 And need he had of slumber yet, for none
 Had suffered more – his hardships were comparative
 To those related in my grand-dad’s Narrative. 

CXXXVIII.

Not so Haidee; she sadly tossed and tumbled,
 And started from her sleep, and, turning o’er,
 Dreamed of a thousand wrecks, o’er which she stumbled,
 And handsome corpses strewed upon the shore;
 And woke her maid so early that she grumbled,
 And called her father’s old slaves up, who swore
 In several oaths – Armenian, Turk, and Greek –
 They knew not what to think of such a freak. 

CXXXIX.

But up she got, and up she made them get,
 With some pretence about the sun, that makes
 Sweet skies just when he rises, or is set –
 And ’tis, no doubt, a sight to see, when breaks
 Bright Phoebus, while the mountains still are wet
 With mist and every bird with him awakes,
 And night is flung off like a mourning-suit
 Worn for a husband, or some other brute. 

CXL.

I say, the sun is a most glorious sight,
 I’ve seen him rise full oft, indeed of late
 I have sat up on purpose all the night,
 Which hastens, as physicians say, one’s fate –
 And so all ye, who would be in the right
 In health and purse, begin your day to date
 From daybreak, and when coffined at fourscore,
 Engrave upon the plate, you rose at four. 

CXLI.

And Haidee met the morning face to face! 
Her own was freshest, though a feverish flush
 Had dyed it with the headlong blood, whose race
 From heart to cheek is curbed into a blush,
 Like to a torrent which a mountain’s base,
 That overpowers some alpine river’s rush,
 Checks to a lake, whose waves in circles spread –
 Or the Red Sea (but the sea is not red). 

CXLII.

And down the cliff the island virgin came,
 And near the cave her quick light footsteps drew,
 While the sun smiled on her with his first flame,
 And young Aurora kissed her lips with dew,
 Taking her for a sister – just the same
 Mistake you would have made on seeing the two,
 Although the mortal, quite as fresh and fair,
 Had all the advantage too of not being air. 

CXLIII.

And when into the cavern Haidee stepped
 All timidly, yet rapidly, she saw
 That like an infant Juan sweetly slept;
 And then she stopped, and stood as if in awe
 (For sleep is awful) and on tiptoe crept
 And wrapped him closer, lest the air, too raw,
 Should reach his blood – then o’er him still as death
 Bent, with hushed lips, that drank his scarce-drawn breath. 

CXLIV.

And thus like to an angel o’er the dying
 Who die in righteousness, she leaned; and there
 All tranquilly the shipwrecked boy was lying,
 As o’er him lay the calm and stirless air;
 But Zoë the meantime some eggs was frying,
 Since, after all, no doubt the youthful pair
 Must breakfast, and betimes-lest they should ask it,
 She drew out her provision from the basket. 

CXLV.

She knew that the best feelings must have victual,
 And that a shipwrecked youth would hungry be;
 Besides, being less in love, she yawned a little,
 And felt her veins chilled by the neighbouring sea;
 And so, she cooked their breakfast to a tittle;
 I can’t say that she gave them any tea,
 But there were eggs, fruit, coffee, bread, fish, honey,
 With Scio wine – and all for love, not money! 

CXLVI.

And Zoë, when the eggs were ready, and
 The coffee made, would fain have wakened Juan;
 But Haidee stopped her with her quick small hand,
 And without word, a sign her finger drew on
 Her lip, which Zoë needs must understand,
 And, the first breakfast spoilt, prepared a new one,
 Because her mistress would not let her break
 That sleep which seemed as it would ne’er awake. 

CXLVII.

For still he lay, and on his thin worn cheek
 A purple hectic played like dying day
 On the snow-tops of distant hills; the streak
 Of sufferance yet upon his forehead lay,
 Where the blue veins looked shadowy, shrunk and weak;
 And his black curls were dewy with the spray
 Which weighed upon them yet, all damp and salt,
 Mixed with the stony vapours of the vault. 

CXLVIII.

And she bent o’er him, and he lay beneath
 Hushed as the babe upon its mother’s breast,
 Drooped as the willow when no winds can breathe,
 Lulled like the depth of ocean when at rest,
 Fair as the crowning rose of the whole wreath,
 Soft as the callow cygnet in its nest –
 In short, he was a very pretty fellow,
 Although his woes had turned him rather yellow! 

CXLIX.

He woke and gazed, and would have slept again,
 But the fair face which met his eyes forbade
 Those eyes to close (though weariness and pain
 Had further sleep a further pleasure made),
 For woman’s face was never formed in vain
 For Juan, so that even when he prayed
 He turned from grisly saints, and martyrs hairy,
 To the sweet portraits of the Virgin Mary. 

CL.

And thus upon his elbow he arose
 And looked upon the lady, in whose cheek
 The pale contended with the purple rose,
 As with an effort she began to speak –
 Her eyes were eloquent, her words would pose,
 Although she told him, in good modern Greek,
 With an Ionian accent, low and sweet,
 That he was faint, and must not talk, but eat. 

CLXVIII.

And every day by daybreak – rather early
 For Juan, who was somewhat fond of rest –
 She came into the cave, but it was merely
 To see her bird reposing in his nest;
 And she would softly stir his locks so curly,
 Without disturbing her yet slumbering guest,
 Breathing all gently o’er his cheek and mouth,
 As o’er a bed of roses the sweet south. 

CLXIX.

And every morn his colour freshlier came,
 And every day helped on his convalescence. 
’Twas well, because health in the human frame
 Is pleasant, besides being true love’s essence,
 For health and idleness to passion’s flame
 Are oil and gunpowder – and some good lessons
 Are also learnt from Ceres and from Bacchus,
 Without whom Venus will not long attack us. 

CLXX.

While Venus fills the heart (without heart really
 Love, though good always, is not quite so good)
 Ceres presents a plate of vermicelli –
 For love must be sustained like flesh and blood –
 While Bacchus pours out wine, or hands a jelly:
 Eggs, oysters too, are amatory food;
 But who is their purveyor from above
 Heaven knows – it may be Neptune, Pan, or Jove. 

CLXXI.

When Juan woke he found some good things ready:
 A bath, a breakfast, and the finest eyes
 That ever made a youthful heart less steady –
 Besides her maid’s, as pretty for their size –
 But I have spoken of all this already
 (And repetition’s tiresome and unwise),
 Well – Juan, after bathing in the sea,
 Came always back to coffee and Haidee. 

CLXXII.

Both were so young, and one so innocent,
 That bathing passed for nothing: Juan seemed
 To her (as ’twere) the kind of being sent,
 Of whom these two years she had nightly dreamed,
 A something to be loved, a creature meant
 To be her happiness, and whom she deemed
 To render happy. All who joy would win,
 Must share it – happiness was born a twin! 

CLXXIII.

It was such pleasure to behold him, such
 Enlargement of existence to partake
 Nature with him, to thrill beneath his touch,
 To watch him slumbering, and to see him wake. 
To live with him for ever were too much;
 But then the thought of parting made her quake! 
He was her own, her ocean-treasure, cast
 Like a rich wreck – her first love, and her last. 

CLXXIV.

And thus a moon rolled on, and fair Haidee
 Paid daily visits to her boy, and took
 Such plentiful precautions, that still he
 Remained unknown within his craggy nook;
 At last her father’s prows put out to sea,
 For certain merchantmen upon the look,
 Not as of yore to carry off an Io,
 But three Ragusan vessels, bound for Scio. 

CLXXV.

Then came her freedom, for she had no mother,
 So that, her father being at sea, she was
 Free as a married woman, or such other
 Female, as where she likes may freely pass,
 Without even the incumbrance of a brother –
 The freest she that ever gazed on glass
 (I speak of Christian lands in this comparison,
 Where wives, at least, are seldom kept in garrison.) 

CLXXVI.

Now she prolonged her visits and her talk
 (For they must talk), and he had learnt to say
 So much as to propose to take a walk –
 For little had he wandered since the day
 On which, like a young flower snapped from the stalk,
 Drooping and dewy on the beach he lay –
 And thus they walked out in the afternoon,
 And saw the sun set opposite the moon. 

CLXXXV.

They looked up to the sky, whose floating glow
 Spread like a rosy ocean, vast and bright;
 They gazed upon the glittering sea below,
 Whence the broad moon rose circling into sight;
 They heard the wave’s splash, and the wind so low,
 And saw each other’s dark eyes darting light
 Into each other, and, beholding this,
 Their lips drew near, and clung into a kiss –

CLXXXVI.

A long, long kiss, a kiss of youth and love
 And beauty, all concentrating like rays
 Into one focus, kindled from above –
 Such kisses as belong to early days,
 Where heart, and soul, and sense, in concert move,
 And the blood’s lava, and the pulse a blaze,
 Each kiss a heart-quake (for a kiss’s strength,
 I think, it must be reckoned by its length). 

CLXXXVII.

By length I mean duration; theirs endured
 Heaven knows how long – no doubt they never reckoned;
 And if they had, they could not have secured
 The sum of their sensations to a second. 
They had not spoken; but they felt allured,
 As if their souls and lips each other beckoned,
 Which, being joined, like swarming bees they clung –
 Their hearts the flowers from whence the honey sprung. 

CLXXXVIII.

They were alone, but not alone as they
 Who shut in chambers think it loneliness:
 The silent ocean, and the starlight bay,
 The twilight glow, which momently grew less,
 The voiceless sands, and dropping caves, that lay
 Around them, made them to each other press,
 As if there were no life beneath the sky
 Save theirs, and that their life could never die. 

CLXXXIX.

They feared no eyes nor ears on that lone beach,
 They felt no terrors from the night, they were
 All in all to each other: though their speech
 Was broken words, they thought a language there –
 And all the burning tongues the passions teach
 Found in one sigh the best interpreter
 Of Nature’s oracle – first love – that all
 Which Eve has left her daughters since her fall. 

CXC.

Haidee spoke not of scruples, asked no vows,
 Nor offered any; she had never heard
 Of plight and promises to be a spouse,
 Or perils by a loving maid incurred;
 She was all which pure ignorance allows,
 And flew to her young mate like a young bird –
 And, never having dreamt of falsehood, she
 Had not one word to say of constancy. 

CXCI.

She loved, and was beloved – she adored,
 And she was worshipped; after Nature’s fashion
 Their intense souls, into each other poured,
 If souls could die, had perished in that passion;
 But by degrees their senses were restored,
 Again to be o’ercome, again to dash on –
 And, beating ’gainst his bosom, Haidee’s heart
 Felt as if never more to beat apart. 

CXCII.

Alas! they were so young, so beautiful,
 So lonely, loving, helpless, and the hour
 Was that in which the heart is always full,
 And, having o’er itself no further power,
 Prompts deeds eternity can not annul,
 But pays off moments in an endless shower
 Of hell-fire – all prepared for people giving
 Pleasure or pain to one another living. 

CXCIII.

Alas! for Juan and Haidee! they were
 So loving and so lovely – till then never,
 Excepting our first parents, such a pair
 Had run the risk of being damned for ever;
 And Haidee, being devout as well as fair,
 Had, doubtless heard about the Stygian river,
 And Hell and Purgatory – but forgot
 Just in the very crisis she should not. 

CXCIV.

They look upon each other, and their eyes
 Gleam in the moonlight; and her white arm clasps
 Round Juan’s head, and his around hers lies
 Half buried in the tresses which it grasps;
 She sits upon his knee, and drinks his sighs,
 He hers, until they end in broken gasps;
 And thus they form a group that’s quite antique,
 Half naked, loving, natural, and Greek. 

CXCV.

And when those deep and burning moments passed,
 And Juan sunk to sleep within her arms,
 She slept not, but all tenderly, though fast,
 Sustained his head upon her bosom’s charms;
 And now and then her eye to heaven is cast,
 And then on the pale cheek her breast now warms,
 Pillowed on her o’erflowing heart, which pants
 With all it granted, and with all it grants. 

Canto III.

XII.

Haidee and Juan were not married, but
 The fault was theirs, not mine. It is not fair,
 Chaste reader, then, in any way to put
 The blame on me, unless you wish they were –
 Then, if you’d have them wedded, please to shut
 The book which treats of this erroneous pair,
 Before the consequences grow too awful! 
’Tis dangerous to read of loves unlawful. 

XIII.

Yet they were happy, happy in the illicit
 Indulgence of their innocent desires;
 But more imprudent grown with every visit,
 Haidee forgot the island was her sire’s
 (When we have what we like, ’tis hard to miss it,
 At least in the beginning, ere one tires),
 Thus she came often, not a moment losing,
 Whilst her piratical papa was cruising. 

Canto IV

XXIX.

Now pillowed cheek to cheek, in loving sleep,
 Haidee and Juan their siesta took,
 A gentle slumber, but it was not deep,
 For ever and anon a something shook
 Juan, and shuddering o’er his frame would creep;
 And Haidee’s sweet lips murmured like a brook
 A wordless music, and her face so fair
 Stirred with her dream as rose-leaves with the air;

XXX.

Or as the stirring of a deep clear stream
 Within an Alpine hollow, when the wind
 Walks o’er it, was she shaken by the dream,
 The mystical usurper of the mind –
 O’erpowering us to be whate’er may seem
 Good to the soul which we no more can bind. 
Strange state of being (for ’tis still to be),
 Senseless to feel, and with sealed eyes to see! 

XXXI.

She dreamed of being alone on the sea-shore,
 Chained to a rock; she knew not how, but stir
 She could not from the spot, and the loud roar
 Grew, and each wave rose roughly, threatening her;
 And o’er her upper lip they seemed to pour
 Until she sobbed for breath, and soon they were
 Foaming o’er her lone head, so fierce and high
 Each broke to drown her, yet she could not die. 

XXXII.

Anon she was released, and then she strayed
 O’er the sharp shingles with her bleeding feet,
 And stumbled almost every step she made;
 And something rolled before her in a sheet,
 Which she must still pursue howe’er afraid –
 ’Twas white and indistinct, nor stopped to meet
 Her glance nor grasp, for still she gazed and grasped
 And ran, but it escaped her as she clasped. 

XXXIII.

The dream changed: in a cave she stood, its walls
 Were hung with marble icicles (the work
 Of ages on its water-fretted halls,
 Where waves might wash, and seals might breed and lurk),
 Her hair was dripping, and the very balls
 Of her black eyes seemed turned to tears, and murk
 The sharp rocks looked below each drop they caught,
 Which froze to marble as it fell, she thought. 

XXXIV.

And wet, and cold, and lifeless at her feet,
 Pale as the foam that frothed on his dead brow,
 Which she essayed in vain to clear (how sweet
 Were once her cares, how idle seemed they now!) 
Lay Juan, nor could aught renew the beat
 Of his quenched heart; and the sea dirges low
 Rang in her sad ears like a mermaid’s song –
 And that brief dream appeared a life too long. 

XXXV.

And gazing on the dead, she thought his face
 Faded, or altered into something new,
 Like to her father’s features, till each trace
 More like and like to Lambro’s aspect grew,
 With all his keen worn look and Grecian grace –
 And starting, she awoke. And what to view? 
Oh, Powers of Heaven! what dark eye meets she there? 
’Tis – ’tis her father’s – fixed upon the pair! 

XXXVI.

Then shrieking she arose, and shrieking fell,
 With joy and sorrow, hope and fear, to see
 Him whom she deemed a habitant where dwell
 The ocean-buried, risen from death, to be
 Perchance the death of one she loved too well:
 Dear as her father had been to Haidee,
 It was a moment of that awful kind –
 I have seen such, but must not call to mind! 

XXXVII.

Up Juan sprung to Haidee’s bitter shriek,
 And caught her falling, and from off the wall
 Snatched down his sabre, in hot haste to wreak
 Vengeance on him who was the cause of all:
 Then Lambro, who till now forbore to speak,
 Smiled scornfully, and said, ‘Within my call,
 A thousand scimitars await the word –
 Put up, young man, put up your silly sword!’ 

XXXVIII.

And Haidee clung around him: ‘Juan, ’tis –
 ’Tis Lambro – ’tis my father! Kneel with me –
 He will forgive us – yes – it must be – yes! 
Oh dearest father! in this agony
 Of pleasure and of pain – even while I kiss
 Thy garment’s hem with transport, can it be
 That doubt should mingle with my filial joy? 
Deal with me as thou wilt, but spare this boy!’ 

XXXIX.

High and inscrutable the old man stood,
 Calm in his voice, and calm within his eye
 (Not always signs with him of calmest mood);
 He looked upon her, but gave no reply,
 Then turned to Juan, in whose cheek the blood
 Oft came and went, as there resolved to die –
 In arms at least he stood, in act to spring
 On the first foe whom Lambro’s call might bring. 

XL.

‘Young man, your sword!’ so Lambro once more said:
 Juan replied, ‘Not while this arm is free!’ 
The old man’s cheek grew pale, but not with dread,
 And drawing from his belt a pistol, he
 Replied, ‘Your blood be then on your own head!’ 
Then looked close at the flint, as if to see
 ’Twas fresh (for he had lately used the lock),
 And next proceeded quietly to cock. 

XLI.

It has a strange quick jar upon the ear,
 That cocking of a pistol, when you know
 A moment more will bring the sight to bear
 Upon your person, twelve yards off, or so
 A gentlemanly distance, not too near,
 If you have got a former friend for foe),
 But after being fired at once or twice,
 The ear becomes more Irish, and less nice. 

XLII.

Lambro presented, and one instant more
 Had stopped this Canto, and Don Juan’s breath,
 When Haidee threw herself her boy before;
 Stern as her sire, ‘On me’, she cried, ‘let death
 Descend! The fault is mine. This fatal shore
 He found – but sought not. I have pledged my faith;
 I love him – I will die with him. I knew
 Your nature’s firmness – know your daughter’s too!’ 

XLIII.

A minute past, and she had been all tears,
 And tenderness, and infancy; but now
 She stood as one who championed human fears –
 Pale, statue-like, and stern, she wooed the blow;
 And tall beyond her sex, and their compeers,
 She drew up to her height, as if to show
 A fairer mark, and with a fixed eye scanned
 Her father’s face – but never stopped his hand! 

XLIV.

He gazed on her, and she on him – ’twas strange
 How like they looked! The expression was the same:
 Serenely savage, with a little change
 In the large dark eye’s mutual-darted flame;
 For she too was as one who could avenge,
 If cause should be – a lioness, though tame! 
Her father’s blood before her father’s face
 Boiled up, and proved her truly of his race. 

XLV.

I said they were alike, their features and
 Their stature differing but in sex and years;
 Even to the delicacy of their hand
 There was resemblance, such as true blood wears;
 And now to see them, thus divided, stand
 In fixed ferocity (when joyous tears,
 And sweet sensations, should have welcomed both)
 Shows what the passions are in their full growth! 

XLVI.

The father paused a moment, then withdrew
 His weapon, and replaced it; but stood still,
 And looking on her, as to look her through,
 ‘Not I’, he said, ‘have sought this stranger’s ill –
 Not I have made this desolation. Few
 Would bear such outrage, and forbear to kill –
 But I must do my duty. How thou hast
 Done thine, the present vouches for the past! 

XLVII.

‘Let him disarm; or, by my father’s head,
 His own shall roll before you like a ball!’ 
He raised his whistle, as the word he said,
 And blew; another answered to the call,
 And, rushing in, disorderly, though led
 (And armed from boot to turban, one and all),
 Some twenty of his train came, rank on rank. 
He gave the word, ‘Arrest or slay the Frank!’ 

XLVIII.

Then, with a sudden movement, he withdrew
 His daughter; while compressed within his clasp,
 ’Twixt her and Juan interposed the crew –
 In vain she struggled in her father’s grasp,
 His arms were like a serpent’s coil! Then flew
 Upon their prey, as darts an angry asp,
 The file of pirates – save the foremost, who
 Had fallen, with his right shoulder half cut through. 

XLIX.

The second had his cheek laid open; but
 The third (a wary, cool old sworder) took
 The blows upon his cutlass, and then put
 His own well in – so well, ere you could look,
 His man was floored, and helpless at his foot,
 With the blood running like a little brook
 From two smart sabre gashes, deep and red,
 One on the arm, the other on the head. 

L.

And then they bound him where he fell, and bore
 Juan from the apartment: with a sign
 Old Lambro bade them take him to the shore,
 Where lay some ships which were to sail at nine. 
They laid him in a boat, and plied the oar
 Until they reached some galliots, placed in line;
 On board of one of these, and under hatches,
 They stowed him, with strict orders to the watches. 

LI.

The world is full of strange vicissitudes,
 And here was one exceedingly unpleasant:
 A gentleman, so rich in the world’s goods,
 Handsome and young, enjoying all the present,
 Just at the very time when he least broods
 On such a thing, is suddenly to sea sent,
 Wounded and chained, so that he cannot move –
 And all because a lady fell in love! 

LVIII.

The last sight which she saw was Juan’s gore,
 And he himself o’ermastered and cut down
 (His blood was running on the very floor
 Where late he trod, her beautiful, her own) –
 Thus much she viewed an instant and no more –
 Her struggles ceased with one convulsive groan. 
On her sire’s arm, which until now scarce held
 Her writhing, fell she like a cedar felled. 

LIX.

A vein had burst, and her sweet lips’ pure dyes
 Were dabbled with the deep blood which ran o’er;
 And her head drooped as when the lily lies
 O’ercharged with rain. Her summoned handmaids bore
 Their lady to her couch with gushing eyes;
 Of herbs and cordials they produced their store,
 But she defied all means they could employ,
 Like one life could not hold, nor death destroy. 

LX.

Days lay she in that state unchanged (though chill,
 With nothing livid – still her lips were red);
 She had no pulse, but death seemed absent still. 
No hideous sign proclaimed her surely dead –
 Corruption came not, in each mind to kill
 All hope – to look upon her sweet face bred
 New thoughts of life, for it seemed full of soul:
 She had so much, earth could not claim the whole. 

LXIX.

Twelve days and nights she withered thus. At last,
 Without a groan, or sigh, or glance, to show
 A parting pang, the spirit from her past;
 And they who watched her nearest could not know
 The very instant, till the change that cast
 Her sweet face into shadow, dull and slow,
 Glazed o’er her eyes – the beautiful, the black –
 Oh, to possess such lustre – and then lack! 

LXX.

She died, but not alone: she held within
 A second principle of life, which might
 Have dawned a fair and sinless child of sin,
 But closed its little being without light,
 And went down to the grave unborn, wherein
 Blossom and bough lie withered with one blight;
 In vain the dews of heaven descend above
 The bleeding flower, and blasted fruit, of love. 

LXXI.

Thus lived, thus died, she. Never more on her
 Shall sorrow light, or shame. She was not made
 Through years, or moons, the inner weight to bear
 Which colder hearts endure till they are laid
 By age in earth; her days and pleasures were
 Brief, but delightful – such as had not stayed
 Long with her destiny; but she sleeps well
 By the sea-shore, whereon she loved to dwell. 

LXXII.

That isle is now all desolate and bare,
 Its dwellings down, its tenants past away. 
None but her own and father’s grave is there,
 And nothing outward tells of human clay:
 Ye could not know where lies a thing so fair –
 No stone is there to show, no tongue to say,
 What was – no dirge, except the hollow sea’s,
 Mourns o’er the Beauty of the Cyclades. 
