Life calls us ...

Life calls us, and we go, massing our courage;
But in the short hour when grief’s thunder stints,
And passions sleep, when the heart’s strife is mute,
The soul takes breath awhile from the world’s troubles,
And suddenly the far-off Edens shine,
And meditations come to power again.

Sometimes when he is half-way up a mountain,
A traveller stops to cast his eyes around;
Flowers and May sunshine in the vale behind him,
Before him, granite and wintry chill.
Like him, I now abjure a forward look,
More often now than not my eyes turn back.

How many things I shall not see again:
The charms of joy, likewise misfortune’s charms;
How much that I once loved, and once held sacred,
Was smashed by the hand of Fortune, and is gone;
Yet how could my soul forget all this,
How could it pass, leaving no trace?

And can you all be lifeless ghosts for me,
Who took from me, in my own vernal years,
Gifts of hot tears and gifts of bitter pain?
Ones who have perished! Can you now be strangers,
And be remembered, in my heart’s indolence,
Infrequently and darkly, as if I dreamt?

O lady of whom I, weeping, took my leave,
Whose path the merciless Creator turned:
The youthful champion of sacred love,
You submitted, and you took your crown of thorns;
But the bare wastelands of the deadly North
Swallowed alike your saintly deeds, your death.

I see the place whither you took your anguish
And faded in suffering words could not express:
Even there, perhaps, no heart recalls your torments,
Perhaps your gravestone does not bear your name;
The years have passed — your ring is on my hand:
I see it, yet do not mark it in my mind.

Yet at the moment when I parted from you,
It seemed to me that I could best endure;
That I could love, that I would not forget you,
That twenty years of grief would speed like hours.
But now I see another shade before me,
One seeming sadder, lady, even than yours.

O unknown grave, o grave that lies far distant!
The years have galloped past that grave as well!
The devastating force lives on in fancy,
And in my snuggles senseless pride persists;
For, child, the futile dream that murdered you
Waits on the time when it can kill me too!

In the stillness of the night your life was ended,
Let it not be me who now forgets that death!
Two or three friends, in agony, were clustered
That night, around the sinking exile’s bed;
Scarce audible his breath, it came so quiet:
Yet his mother, and his motherland, were rapt.

How young you were when destiny assailed you!
The sacred feelings were still quick and warm;
In the coming gloom your gaze had long been seeking
Virtuous paths and deeds that would live on:
The cruel lessons of advancing age
You did not learn; how blessed you were in that!

Blessed! although you closed your eyes in exile!
You still advanced towards that single end;
So, with a cross upon their warlike garb,
Did knights of old go to Jerusalem;
When thunder rolled, and hope’s destiny was dust,
The pilgrim had long fallen on the road.

Here’s yet one more! O, torture to my feelings,
How light they sleep! Yes, yet another comes!
Childe Harold, alas, was right: there are too many,
Yes, though so few — and who from time to time
Has not gone pale, and covered up his face,
On reading through the melancholy list?

How many are the poets that we buried,
Culled in the flower of youth by envious fate!
He was the first — can I forget those tidings?
And others were to come, more painful yet:
Yes! Once again a pistol shot had triumphed;
But another death smote deeper in my breast.

Can it be true, favourite of inspiration,
Who vanished like a dream’s sad paling ghost,
Can it be true the land where you were born,
Grieved not for you, and paid no last respects?
And is it I, Evgeny, who must name you,
Do only I give you the gift of verse?

But take my gift now, in this fateful hour,
But take it now, since others say no word,
Alas! will-o’-the wisps of former feelings,
Why do you glow amid the lightless gloom?
Wherefore this feeble, meaningless combustion?
Who called you forth, days of my vanished youth?

Why, distant face, do you too fix your eyes
Unswerving on me, staring pallidly?
I am calm now; years have gone past without you;
You went off long ago: why are you here?
Let me alone! in the East the pale day rises,
Begone, sad phantoms’ chorus, let me go!

The pale day rises, the diamond stars are fading,
Day calls to work, demands that things be done;
It is high time this dreary road was ended,
Time to forget what life has overcome,
And sober up intoxicated fancy,
Cast off the trace of daydreams from my brow.
