To My Friend S. -B.

An eagle, that's what genius is! Bird of storm,
Seeking in the highest mountains the highest peak;
Whose proud cry sings awake the fiery dawn;
Who never soils his talons in the mire,
And whose flaming eye unceasingly trades
Flashes with the sun.

His nest is not a nest of moss; it's an eyrie,
Some boulder, hollowed out by a thunderbolt,
Some gap in the summit appalling to the eye,
Some crumbling refuge on the flanks of sublime heights,
Which is seen, wind-beaten, hanging between two depths,
Black abyss and sky!

It's not the humble worms, or gilded bees,
Or green dragonflies with multi-colored wings,
That his little ones wait for, their mouths agape;
No! It's the doubtful bird that vegetates at night
That he drops to his eaglets, the unclean lizard,
The hideous snake.

Royal nest! Dark palace, to which the rolling
Avalanche of leaping floods of snow lays siege!
Genius cherishes his children in that throne,
And turning toward the sun their flame-filled eyes,
Under fiery wings he incubates their souls
To grow wings of their own!

So why be astonished, Friend, if over your head
A cloud heavy with thunder has already paused,
Or in your nest you see some foul reptile struggle?
These are your first games, this is your first holiday:
For you eaglets, each hour will have its tempest,
Each banquet its battle.

Shine now, for it is time! And if a storm arrives,
Change the black cloud into a scintillating prism!
Bring to fulfillment your thinking high and wise!
Join the hand of a brother to my fraternal hand.
Poet, take up your lyre; eagle, spread your young wing;
Star, O star, arise!

The mist of your dawn, my Friend, is now dispersing.
Come and conquer fame with your inspired songs;
Make your name known, eaglet, to the lightning, to the morn.
This glory, subject to so many vulgar shafts,
Resembles proud banners brought back from the wars,
More beautiful when torn!

See the long-haired star, a royal meteor,
Enlarging as it rolls from the worlds it devours.
Such things, young giant, augment you as you go,
So your burning genius, far from charted paths,
Absorbing in its course the worlds of thought,
Will forever grow.
