Gertrude of Wyoming

[Part II]

I.

A valley, from the river-shore withdrawn,
 Was Albert’s home, two quiet woods between
 Whose lofty verdure overlooked his lawn;
 And waters to their resting-place serene
 Came freshening, and reflecting all the scene –
 A mirror in the depth of flowery shelves! 
So sweet a spot of earth you might (I ween)
 Have guessed some congregation of the elves
 To sport by summer moons had shaped it for themselves. 

II.

Yet wanted not the eye far scope to muse,
 Nor vistas opened by the wandering stream;
 Both where at evening Allegany views,
 Through ridges burning in her western beam,
 Lake after lake interminably gleam –
 And past those settlers’ haunts the eye might roam,
 Where earth’s unliving silence all would seem,
 Save where on rocks the beaver built his dome
 Or buffalo remote lowed far from human home. 

III.

But silent not that adverse eastern path
 Which saw Aurora’s hills the horizon crown:
 There was the river heard, in bed of wrath
 (A precipice of foam from mountains brown),
 Like tumults heard from some far distant town –
 But, softening in approach, he left his gloom
 And murmured pleasantly, and laid him down
 To kiss those easy curving banks of bloom
 That lent the windward air an exquisite perfume. 

IV.

It seemed as if those scenes sweet influence had
 On Gertrude’s soul, and kindness like their own
 Inspired those eyes affectionate and glad,
 That seemed to love whate’er they looked upon. 
Whether with Hebe’s mirth her features shone,
 Or if a shade more pleasing them o’ercast
 (As if for heavenly musing meant alone),
 Yet so becomingly the expression past
 That each succeeding look was lovelier than the last. 

V.

Nor, guess I, was that Pennsylvanian home,
 With all its picturesque and balmy grace,
 And fields that were a luxury to roam,
 Lost on the soul that looked from such a face! 
Enthusiast of the woods, when years apace
 Had bound thy lovely waist with woman’s zone,
 The sunrise-path at morn I see thee trace
 To hills with high magnolia overgrown,
 And joy to breathe the groves, romantic and alone. 

VI.

The sunrise drew her thoughts to Europe forth
 That thus apostrophized its viewless scene:
 ‘Land of my father’s love, my mother’s birth! 
The home of kindred I have never seen! 
We know not other – oceans are between –
 Yet say! far friendly hearts from whence we came,
 Of us does oft remembrance intervene? 
My mother sure, my sire, a thought may claim,
 But Gertrude is to you an unregarded name. 

VII.

And yet, loved England! when thy name I trace
 In many a pilgrim’s tale and poet’s song,
 How can I choose but wish for one embrace
 Of them, the dear unknown, to whom belong
 My mother’s looks – perhaps her likeness strong? 
Oh parent! with what reverential awe,
 From features of thine own related throng,
 An image of thy face my soul could draw –
 And see thee once again whom I too shortly saw! 

VIII.

Yet deem not Gertrude sighed for foreign joy –
 To soothe a father’s couch her only care,
 And keep his reverend head from all annoy. 
For this, methinks, her homeward steps repair
 Soon as the morning-wreath had bound her hair,
 While yet the wild deer trod in spangling dew,
 While boatman carolled to the fresh-blown air,
 And woods a horizontal shadow threw,
 And early fox appeared in momentary view. 

IX.

At times there was a deep untrodden grot,
 Where of the reading-hours sweet Gertrude wore;
 Tradition had not named its lonely spot,
 But here, methinks, India’s sons explore
 Their father’s dust, or lift, perchance, of yore,
 Their voice to the Great Spirit – rocks sublime
 To human art a sportive semblance wore,
 And yellow lichens coloured all the clime
 Like moonlight battlements, and towers decayed by time. 

X.

But high, in amphitheatre above,
 His arms the everlasting aloes threw –
 Breathed but an air of Heaven, and all the grove
 As if with instinct living spirit grew,
 Rolling its verdant gulfs of every hue. 
And now suspended was the pleasing din,
 Now from a murmur faint it swelled anew –
 Like the first note of organ heard within
 Cathedral aisles, ere yet its symphony begin. 

XI.

It was in this lone valley she would charm
 The lingering noon, where flowers a couch had strewn,
 Her cheek reclining, and her snowy arm
 On hillock by the palm-tree half o’ergrown –
 And aye that volume on her lap is thrown
 Which every heart of human mould endears:
 With Shakespeare’s self she speaks and smiles alone,
 And no intruding visitation fears
 To shame the unconscious laugh, or stop her sweetest tears. 

XII.

For, save her presence, scarce an ear had heard
 The stock-dove plaining through its gloom profound,
 Or winglet of the fairy humming-bird
 Like atoms of the rainbow fluttering round,
 Till chance had ushered to its inmost ground
 The stranger-guest of many a distant clime. 
He was (to weet) for eastern mountains bound,
 But late the equator suns his cheek had tanned,
 And California’s gales his roving bosom fanned. 

XIII.

A steed, whose rein hung loosely o’er his arm,
 He led dismounted; ere his leisure pace
 Amid the brown leaves could her ear alarm
 Close he had come, and worshipped for a space
 Those downcast features – she her lovely face
 Uplift on one whose lineaments and frame
 Wore youth and manhood’s intermingled grace:
 Iberian seemed his boot, his robe the same,
 And well the Spanish plume his lofty looks became. 

XIV.

For Albert’s home he sought – her finger fair
 Has pointed where the father’s mansion stood. 
Returning from the copse, he soon was there;
 And soon has Gertrude hied from dark green wood,
 Nor joyless, by the converse, understood,
 Between the man of age and pilgrim young –
 That gay congeniality of mood
 And early liking from acquaintance sprung. 
Full fluently conversed their guest in England’s tongue,

XV.

And well could he his pilgrimage of taste
 Unfold, and much they loved his fervid strain
 While he each fair variety retraced
 Of climes, and manners, o’er the eastern main:
 Now happy Switzer’s hills, romantic Spain,
 Gay lilied fields of France, or, more refined,
 The soft Ausonia’s monumental reign –
 Nor less each rural image he designed
 Than all the city’s pomp, and home of human kind. 

XVI.

Anon some wilder portraiture he draws:
 Of Nature’s savage glories he would speak –
 The loneliness of Earth that overawes
 Where, resting by some tomb of old cacique,
 The lama-driver on Peruvia’s peak
 Nor voice, nor living motion, marks around,
 But storks that to the boundless forest shriek,
 Or wild-cane arch high flung o’er gulf profound,
 That fluctuates when the storms of El Dorado sound! 

XVII.

Pleased with his guest, the good man still would ply
 Each earnest question, and his converse court;
 But Gertrude, as she eyed him, knew not why
 A strange and troubling wonder stopped her short. 
‘In England thou hast been, and by report
 An orphan’s name’, quoth Albert, ‘mayst have known. 
Sad tale! When latest fell our frontier-fort
 One innocent, one soldier’s child, alone
 Was spared, and brought to me, who loved him as my own. 

XVIII.

Young Henry Waldegrave – three delightful years
 These very walls his infant sports did see –
 But most I loved him when his parting tears
 Alternately bedewed my child and me. 
His sorest parting, Gertrude, was from thee –
 Nor half his grief his little heart could hold! 
By kindred he was sent for o’er the sea,
 They tore him from us when but twelve years old,
 And scarcely for his loss have I been yet consoled.’ 

XIX.

His face the wanderer hid, but could not hide
 A tear, a smile, upon his cheek that dwell. 
And speak, mysterious stranger!’ Gertrude cried,
 ‘It is – it is – I knew – I knew him well! 
’Tis Waldegrave’s self, of Waldegrave come to tell!’ 
A burst of joy the father’s lips declare,
 But Gertrude speechless on his bosom fell:
 At once his open arms embraced the pair –
 Was never group more blest in this wide world of care! 

XX.

‘And will ye pardon then’, replied the youth,
 ‘Your Waldegrave’s feigned name, and false attire? 
I durst not in the neighbourhood, in truth,
 The very fortunes of your house inquire,
 Lest one that knew me might some tidings dire
 Impart, and I my weakness all betray;
 For had I lost my Gertrude, and my sire,
 I meant but o’er your tombs to weep a day –
 Unknown I meant to weep, unknown to pass away. 

XXI.

But here ye live, ye bloom! In each dear face
 The changing hand of time I may not blame:
 For there it hath but shed more reverend grace,
 And here, of beauty perfected the frame –
 And well I know your hearts are still the same! 
They could not change – ye look the very way
 As when an orphan first to you I came! 
And have ye heard of my poor guide, I pray –
 Nay, wherefore weep we, friends, on such a joyous day?’ 

XXII.

And art thou here – or is it but a dream? 
And wilt thou, Waldegrave, wilt thou leave us more?’ 
‘No, never! Thou that yet dost lovelier seem
 Than aught on earth – than even thyself of yore –
 I will not part thee from thy father’s shore,
 But we shall cherish him with mutual arms,
 And hand-in-hand again the path explore
 Which every ray of young remembrance warms,
 While thou shalt be my own with all thy truth and charms!’ 

XXIII.

At morn, as if beneath a galaxy
 Of over-arching groves in blossoms white
 (Where all was odorous scent and harmony,
 And gladness to the heart, nerve, ear and sight),
 There if, oh gentle love, I read aright
 The utterance that sealed thy sacred bond,
 ’Twas – listening to these accents of delight –
 She hid upon his breast those eyes beyond
 Expression’s power to paint, all languishingly fond. 

XXIV.

‘Flower of my life, so lovely and so lone! 
Whom I would rather in this desert meet,
 Scorning (and scorned by) Fortune’s power, than own
 Her pomp and splendours lavished at my feet! 
Turn not from me thy breath, more exquisite
 Than odours cast on Heaven’s own shrine – to please –
 Give me thy love, than luxury more sweet,
 And more than all the wealth that loads the breeze
 When Coromandel’s ships return form Indian seas!’ 

XXV.

Then would the home admit them – happier far
 Than grandeur’s most magnificent saloon –
 While here and there a solitary star
 Flushed in the darkening firmament of June,
 And silence brought the soul-felt hour, full soon,
 Ineffable, which I may not portray –
 For never did the Hymenean moon
 A paradise of hearts more sacred sway
 In all that slept beneath her soft voluptuous ray! 
