The Ballad of the Flying Dragon

[excerpts]

‘See, mother, how it hurts me? And how my breast it beats,
 How veins on my white bosom turn purple lesion;
 A blaze in me is burning, the frost again it meets,
 My lips afire, mother, my cheeks are cold anon! 

Ah! My heart throbs ... And flies away from me, you see! 
It wants of me ... Who knows what? And what can I give it? 
Now hot, now cold, it flows through all my veins and in me,
 I hold nought in my arms, my arms with lead are fit;

For you see, most sweet mother? The way it comes across
 My own body, mother, before I can surmise,
 And then desire takes me, and then my eyes do gloss
 And tears they shed, O mother, and how can I be wise? 

Just lay your hand, sweet mother, my forehead is in sweat! 
My cheeks ... the one is burning, the other icy is! 
A pain me here possesses, my rib it gnaws, I bet;
 My body in mild languor, I feel it all amiss. 

What can this be, O mother? Does grannie know, think you? 
She could devise some cure ... It could some dragon be,
 Of those that fly up there, the women maybe knew,
 Or maybe does the priest, mum, or wizards do maybe.’ 

Thus cried poor Florica and thus she told her sorrow;
 Below the porch her mother she everything retold;
 Her heifer lower’d softly, the lass felt prone to borrow
 The tales the mother murmured from memories of old. 

‘But what quick light like lightning that dazzles in a wink
 From up the north escapes now and sparkles far away? 
Some shooting star can it be? Maybe some dying king? 
Or, God forbid! Some ogre that flies perching astray? 

It was an ogre, you, lass! Did you not see the dragon? 
He straight unto Florica his wings beat up to fan! 
And down the chimney, goodness! Who would have pondered on
 The ogre, who descended, so everybody ran? 

He was of light an ogre, with a big tail of fire
 And precious stones ablaze set as truly he did shine,
 I say, a young lad he could, with pure love afire,
 Be to her, but, o dear, why should she lie supine? 

He ambushes the lasses, as in deep sleep they lie,
 As slender as the fir tree, the fair-haired lad,
 With bloodless tender veins he so gently draws nearby
 And in his weird covers the ogre he is clad. 

The little lass, o dear! Florica, tender, pure,
 How much her he must torture, see how slim has she gone
 How pale she is, the poor girl! And right was grannie, sure,
 To say that a young virgin with love can be forlorn. 

For now she dreams of tales fine which new tales can engender
 And the engendered dreams then the dragon do restore,
 And, oh, the evil eye, then, or charms or spirits slender,
 None can release the lass now from sufferings of yore. 
