The Circle

In those days of martyrdom and glory, when the axe
Blotted out in blood the vile spittle of the base
On the brows of heroes,
When the orators of Athens and reasoners of Rome
Mocked in their arrogance the sons of God made man
Butchered by the Neroes,

Some holy disciples gathered in the evenings
In the guest room, just a few, on their knees, and spoke
Of the great miracle,
United, believing, strong with an angel’s faith,
For tongues of fire turned and hovered above them —
A strange oracle.

Our days are less evil. Yet there is blasphemy,
And mockers are still hurling their anathema
At the God we never see.
If the poet, apostle of the mystery,
Descends to the earth and brings something from heaven:
“What could be his urgency?”

“What does this singer want of us in his mad rage?”
So words of scorn lead the thought to hide again
In the heart where it was growing,
As returning winter on the mountain slopes
Suspends the surging wave and the immense cascade
Already overflowing.

What to do then? Speak no more? Oh, neverl Onward!
Keep on singing, full of hope in Him our Savior,
Walk with Him in the land;
Then sometimes at night, far from barbaric mockers,
Talk among ourselves, heed the voices seldom heard,
And take each other’s hand.

There, the strong who believe, the weak who hesitate;
The heart warmed by a fire, the heart only a spark
Touches now and then;
The soul that a gleam disturbs and a drop makes drunk;
And an archangel’s eye that reads as in a book
The radiant sun;

Gathered there again, to know and love each other,
And say let us not lose hope, poets, in the lyre:
This age is ours to seize.
It is yours! Then sing on, harmonious voices,
And very soon the envious swarm of mortals
Will fall upon their knees.

A genius has arisen here amidst the storm,
Young and strong; while indignation on his forehead
Flashes out in anger;
But here his sceptre is laid down and set aside;
His glory without lightning grows friendly and mild
And greets all eyes with laughter.

Oh! Long may he sing! For his lute draws us on,
Rallies and guides us, and the battle shall be ours
While we hear it call;
Two or three more turns, at the sound of his trumpet,
At his voice of thunder that a chorus echoes,
And Jericho will fall!

And you, struck first by an insult too notorious,
Chorister of sacred loves, divine and chaste swan,
That they dared to affront,
Oh! no longer hide your white neck under your wing;
Resume your flight and soar to the eternal vault
Without seeming to mount.

A purer day will shine, and already it is dawning.
Poets, to your lutes! ... Why do you still delay,
You, the most charming?
Under what marvellous fingers has melody
A more silken texture, more luxuriant lace,
Or finer diamond?

Flee the smooth enchantress of long hours of leisure;
Glory is there (Go!) which impels you by its gaze
And draws you by its gleam;
Make haste! What voice can sigh with greater tenderness
And mingle in our eyes more tears with our smiles
When love is your theme?

A young man is listening, his head full of thoughts,
And with a sad and gentle look, a silent guest,
Stands at our gatherings:
He is a poet, too; from his ardent palette
Michelangelo will be reborn with Dante
And the old Florentines.

Brotherhood of the arts! Fortunate union!
Evenings whose memory, even after many years,
Will charm us in old age!
And when at last these ravishments are exhausted,
And fate, encountering a life so dear to us
(May it come at the last stage!),

Has taken to its ranks a great man who has fallen,
And has made, as always, an altar of his tomb,
Then, if one of us —
The last and the humblest at these sublime banquets
(For fate too often saves for its noblest victims
Its earliest blows) —

If he survives, alone among these empty seats,
Reading keen requests in youthful eyes around him
For the tale he can tell,
From his own eyes wiping away a swimming tear,
And deeply moved by thoughts of his own youthful days,
Will say, “I knew them well;

“They were great and good. They never let jealousy
Turn the honey of poetry to bitterness
With its sharp arrow,
And never in its course did their dazzling glory
burn with disdain the humble fading cornflower
That bloomed in the furrow.”
