The Walk

I greet you, my mountain, with your peak’s reddish glow;
And I greet you, sun, who shine upon him so delightfully.
I greet you also, bustling plain, and you, rustling lime trees
And the gladsome choir swaying on the branches,
And you, serene expanse of blue, vast cerulean flood
About the brown mountains and above the green forest,
And around me, who, fled at last from imprisoning room
And confining talk, has found a happy deliverance in you.
The balmy stream of your air flows through me refreshingly,
And my thirsty gare is fed by the energy of light.
On the blooming plain the shifting colors blaze forth,
Their delightful strife dissolving into harmony.
The meadow with its wide-spread carpet receives me freely;
The rural path winds through its friendly green.
The busy bee buzzes about me; with hesitant wings
The butterfly hovers above the reddish clover.
The sun’s glowing arrow strikes me; the west winds now are calm,
And only the lark’s song is heard in the bright air.
But sudden there’s a roaring in the near thicket; the elder
Crowns bend low, and the silvered grass sways with the wind.
Surrounded by ambrosial night a splendid roof of shady
Beeches receives me with its fragrant cool.
There in the forest’s secret the landscape is lost to me
At once, and a winding path leads me on and up.
The branches’ leafy trellis is pierced by furtive
Light only, and some smiling glimpses of deep blue.
Suddenly the green veil is torn and the opened wood
Surprises me with the day’s blinding light.
The immeasurable distance pours forth before my gaze
And the azure mountains fade into the distant haze.
At the mountain’s deep base plunging precipitous
Far below is the pale green mirror of the moving stream.
Above and below me the expanse is endless,
I look up in vertigo, look down and shudder.
But between the eternal height and the eternal depth
A handrailed footpath safely leads the wanderer.
Fecund shores flee past me smilingly, and the
Luxurious vale bespeaks a happy industry.
Behold those lines that mark off the farmer’s property
Conjured on the carpet of the plain by Demeter,
Friendly scripture of the law, life-preserving
Deity ever since golden love fled the bronze world.
A shimmering strip, the road that connects the country
Winds through the cultivated fields in freer turns.
Now lost in the wood, now climbing up into the mountains.
Rafts glide down the smooth stream, and the rich sound
Of the bells of flocks is heard in the living fields
Whose echo wakes the solitary shepherd’s song.
Gay villages border the stream; others lost in
Greenery plunge from the mountain’s steep spine.
Humans still live as neighbors of the soil.
Their peaceful fields surrounding their pastoral roofs.
The cozy vine climbs up the low casement, and
The tree hugs the hut with an embracing branch.
O happy people of the plain, not yet roused to freedom.
You joyfully share with your fields the narrow law.
Your wishes are confined to the harvests’ quiet round, and
Like your daily labor your lives take their accustomed course.
But who at once deprives me of the lovely view?
Rapidly an alien spirit spreads over the unfamiliar fields!
What still barely mingled in love falls into brittle disarray
And only the same aligns itself with the same.
I see ranks forming; the poplars’ proud generations
Parade by in ordered and majestic pomp;
Everything turns into rule and choice and significance.
And to me this train of servitude announces the Ruler
Whose distant illuminated domes bruit him to the world;
From its rocky core rises the towering city.
The forest fauns are cast out into the wilderness,
But devotion breathes a higher life into stone.
Humans have moved closer; their world grows more circumscribed,
More actively alert, and revolves more rapidly within them.
Behold where rival forces kindle to fiery battle;
Their strife yields great results, greater still their union.
One spirit moves a thousand hands, in a thousand
Breasts a single heart on fire with the same feeling
Beats for the fatherland and glows for our forebears’ law;
Here in this dear ground repose their honored remains.
The blessed gods descend from the heavens and take up
Their solemn residence in the consecrated precinct.
They come bearing splendid gifts; Ceres supreme brings
The present of the plow, Hermes the anchor,
Bacchus the grape, Minerva the olive tree’s green branch;
The warlike steed is led hither by Poseidon, and
Maternal Cybele who yokes the lions to the axle of
Her carriage enters a citizen through the hospitable gate.
Sacred stones! from you sprang the founders of the human
Race who sent customs and art to ocean’s distant isles;
Sages pronounced the law at these sociable gates;
Heroes issued forth to plunge into battle for the guardian
Gods; nursing mothers with their babes appeared on the city
Walls to gaze upon the marching army devoured by the distance.
In prayer they threw themselves before the altars of their
Gods, pleading for fame and victory, and for your return.
Victory and honor you won, but only fame returned;
The worth of your deeds reported by the stirring stone:
“Traveler, if to Sparta you come, report there
That you have seen us lying here, as the law commanded.”
Rest in peace, O loved ones! The olive branch greens
Sprinkled with your blood; happily sprouts the precious seed.
Untrammeled trade delights in property and thrives joyfully,
And from among the river’s reeds waves the aquamarine god.
As the axe slashes into the tree, the dryad sighs her last,
And from the high mountaintop crashes down the thundering
Load. From the quarry emerges the stone lifted by the lever,
And into the rocky gorge descends the miner.
Mulciber’s anvil rings with rhythmic hammer blows;
The steel sparks spray under his massive fist;
The glittering golden thread winds about the dancing spindle,
Through the chords of the yam flies the weaving shuttle;
The pilot calls from the distant shipyard; the fleets that
Carry domestic industry to foreign lands are waiting
While others return rejoicing with gifts from abroad;
The festive garland waves from the high mast.
Behold where the markets and the crane teem with gladsome life.
A riot of strange languages buzzes in your wondering ear.
The merchant pours earth’s harvests into the store-house.
Amalthaea heaps the horn high with delightful goods,
With what the scorching ray of Airic’s earth bears,
What Arabia cooks and remotest Thule prepares.
Fortune blesses talent with divine offspring,
And the arts of pleasure grow nursed by freedom.
The sculptor delights the eye with imitated life,
And animated by his chisel the feeling stone speaks;
Artful heavens repose on slim Ionian columns
And a Pantheon encloses the whole of Olympus.
The arcing bridge jumps across the raging stream light as
Iris’s leap through the air or arrow sprung from the string.
But in the silent chamber the contemplating sage drafts
Grave circles, stalks in thought the creating spirit,
Tests the force of matter, the magnet’s hate and love.
Follows sound through the air, ray through the sky,
Seeks the familiar law in the accident’s gruesome wonders
And the quiet pole in the whirl of appearances.
Writing endows mute thought with voice and body
Borne through the centuries by the speaking leaf.
See how the fog of false belief fades before the inquiring
Gaze and the images of night yield to the dawning light.
Man, the fortunate one, breaks his fetters. If only he
Did not tend the reins of shame as well as fetters of fear!
Reason calls for liberty — that fierce desire, freedom — and
From nature’s sanctity they licentiously break loose.
Alas, in the storm the anchor is sundered that held him
Safe on caution’s shore; the mighty flood’s violent seizure |
Bears him away into the boundless void, the coast is gone;
The mast-toppled boat rocks high on the mountainous wave;
The Great Wain’s steadfast stars are hidden behind the clouds;
Nothing now endures, even the deity within is lost.
Truth disappears from speech, faith and loyalty
Leave the living, and the false oath lies easy on the lips.
The sycophant forces his way into love’s secrets
And the heart’s most intimate bonds; tears friend from friend;
Treason leers at innocence with a devouring glance
And slander’s tooth kills with its envenomed bite.
Thought is debased in the dishonored breast; love
Dispenses with the divine nobility of frank feeling;
Fraud has usurped your holy signs, O truth, and profaned
The precious voice of Nature that the needy heart
In the press of joy has forged for itself;
And true feeling barely announces itself by holding its tongue.
Justice swaggers on the dais while amity hides in the hut;
The scarecrow of the law lurks by the monarch’s throne;
For years or centuries that mummy may endure
And that deceptive image of the living whole until rousing
Nature throws off sleep and time and need, and with
Heavy leaden hands shakes the hollow edifice like a
Tigress who, having broken through the iron bars,
In sudden and monstrous remembrance of the Numidian forest
Rises up with the fury of crime and humanity’s misery,
And searches for lost nature in the ashes of the city.
So open wide you walls and set free the prisoner
Saved to return to the abandoned fields!
But where am I? The path is hidden. Steep depths bar
My way before and behind me with yawning chasms.
Left behind are the gardens’ and hedges’ trusted
Companionship and any trace of human hands.
I see only the primal stuff heaped high from which life
Arises; the rough basalt hopes for the forming hand;
The mountain torrent tears with a hiss through the rocky
Trench, forces an angry path under the roots of the tree.
Savage this place, and eerily bare; only the eagle hangs
High in the air and links the world with the massed clouds.
No wind's plumage can carry up high here where I am
The lost echo of human struggle and desire.
Am I truly alone, Nature, once more in your arms
And at your heart? Alas, it was only a dream that seized
And held me shuddering with life’s dreadful image;
With the steep-descending valley that dark one fell away,
Purified I take my life from your pure altar,
And reassume the joyful mood of hopeful youth.
The eternal will forever varies both rule and purpose,
Our deeds revolve in forever-repeated forms.
But you, devout and ever youthful nature, with ever -
Changing beauty you hold firm in honoring the ancient law;
Always the same, you faithfully preserve for the man
What the juggling child and the youth entrusted to you;
You nurture at the same breast the many changing ages;
The close-connected and far-dispersed generations
Wander under the same blue, walk on the same green,
And, O see! the sun of Homer smiles on us as well.
