Childe Harold's Pilgrimage

[Canto III, st. 68-75, 85-90: ‘Lake Leman’]

LXVIII.

Lake Leman woos me with its crystal face,
 The mirror where the stars and mountains view
 The stillness of their aspect in each trace
 Its clear depth yields of their far height and hue. 
There is too much of man here, to look through
 With a fit mind the might which I behold;
 But soon in me shall loneliness renew
 Thoughts hid, but not less cherished than of old,
 Ere mingling with the herd had penned me in their fold. 

LXIX.

To fly from, need not be to hate, mankind:
 All are not fit with them to stir and toil,
 Nor is it discontent to keep the mind
 Deep in its fountain, lest it over-boil
 In the hot throng, where we become the spoil
 Of our infection, till too late and long
 We may deplore and struggle with the coil,
 In wretched interchange of wrong for wrong
 Midst a contentious world, striving where none are strong. 

LXX.

There, in a moment, we may plunge our years
 In fatal penitence, and in the blight
 Of our own soul turn all our blood to tears,
 And colour things to come with hues of night! 
The race of life becomes a hopeless flight
 To those that walk in darkness – on the sea
 The boldest steer but where their ports invite –
 But there are wanderers o’er eternity
 Whose bark drives on and on, and anchored ne’er shall be. 

LXXI.

Is it not better, then, to be alone,
 And love Earth only for its earthly sake –
 By the blue rushing of the arrowy Rhone,
 Or the pure bosom of its nursing Lake
 Which feeds it as a mother who doth make
 A fair but froward infant her own care,
 Kissing its cries away as these awake –
 Is it not better thus our lives to wear,
 Than join the crushing crowd, doomed to inflict or bear? 

LXXII.

I live not in myself, but I become
 Portion of that around me, and to me
 High mountains are a feeling, but the hum
 Of human cities torture! I can see
 Nothing to loathe in Nature, save to be
 A link reluctant in a fleshly chain,
 Classed among creatures, when the soul can flee,
 And with the sky, the peak, the heaving plain
 Of ocean, or the stars, mingle – and not in vain. 

LXXIII.

And thus I am absorbed, and this is life:
 I look upon the peopled desert past,
 As on a place of agony and strife,
 Where, for some sin, to sorrow I was cast,
 To act and suffer, but remount at last
 With a fresh pinion – which I feel to spring,
 Though young, yet waxing vigorous as the blast
 Which it would cope with, on delighted wing
 Spurning the clay-cold bonds which round our being cling. 

LXXIV.

And when, at length, the mind shall be all free
 From what it hates in this degraded form,
 Reft of its carnal life, save what shall be
 Existent happier in the fly and worm –
 When elements to elements conform
 And dust is as it should be, shall I not
 Feel all I see less dazzling but more warm? 
The bodiless thought? The spirit of each spot,
 Of which, even now, I share at times the immortal lot? 

LXXV.

Are not the mountains, waves, and skies, a part
 Of me and of my soul, as I of them? 
Is not the love of these deep in my heart
 With a pure passion? Should I not contemn
 All objects, if compared with these – and stem
 A tide of suffering, rather than forego
 Such feelings for the hard and worldly phlegm
 Of those whose eyes are only turned below,
 Gazing upon the ground with thoughts which dare not glow? 

LXXXV.

Clear, placid Leman! thy contrasted lake,
 With the wild world I dwelt in, is a thing
 Which warns me, with its stillness, to forsake
 Earth’s troubled waters for a purer spring. 
This quiet sail is as a noiseless wing
 To waft me from distraction. Once I loved
 Torn ocean’s roar, but thy soft murmuring
 Sounds sweet as if a sister’s voice reproved
 That I with stern delights should e’er have been so moved. 

LXXXVI.

It is the hush of night, and all between
 Thy margin and the mountains, dusk, yet clear
 Mellowed and mingling, yet distinctly seen),
 Save darkened Jura, whose capped heights appear
 Precipitously steep – and drawing near,
 There breathes a living fragrance from the shore,
 Of flowers yet fresh with childhood; on the ear
 Drops the light drip of the suspended oar,
 Or chirps the grasshopper one good-night carol more. 

LXXXVII.

He is an evening reveller, who makes
 His life an infancy, and sings his fill! 
At intervals, some bird from out the brakes
 Starts into voice a moment, then is still. 
There seems a floating whisper on the hill –
 But that is fancy! – for the starlight-dews
 All silently their tears of love instill,
 Weeping themselves away, till they infuse
 Deep into Nature’s breast the spirit of her hues. 

LXXXVIII.

Ye stars, which are the poetry of Heaven! 
If in your bright leaves we would read the fate
 Of men and empires, ’tis to be forgiven
 That in our aspirations to be great,
 Our destinies o’erleap their mortal state,
 And claim a kindred with you – for ye are
 A beauty and a mystery, and create
 In us such love and reverence from afar
 That fortune, fame, power, life, have named themselves a star. 

LXXXIX.

All Heaven and Earth are still – though not in sleep,
 But breathless, as we grow when feeling most,
 And silent, as we stand in thoughts too deep –
 All Heaven and Earth are still! From the high host
 Of stars, to the lulled lake and mountain-coast,
 All is concentred in a life intense
 Where not a beam, nor air, nor leaf is lost,
 But hath a part of being, and a sense
 Of that which is of all creator and defense. 

XC.

Then stirs the feeling infinite, so felt
 In solitude, where we are least alone –
 A truth which through our being then doth melt,
 And purifies from self: it is a tone,
 The soul and source of music, which makes known
 Eternal harmony. 
