Frithiof’s Homestead

[From Canto III]

Three miles extended around the fields of the homestead; on three sides
 Valleys and mountains and hills, but on the fourth side   was the ocean. 
Birch-woods crowned the summits, but over the downsloping hill-sides
 Flourished the golden corn, and man-high was waving   the rye-field. 
Lakes, full many in number, their mirror held up for   the mountains;
 Held for the forest up, in whose depths the high-antlered   reindeers
 Had their kingly walk, and drank of a hundred   brooklets. 
But in the valleys, full widely around, there fed on the   green-sward
 Herds with sleek, shining sides, and udders that longed   for the milk-pail. 
’Mid these were scattered, now here and now there, a   vast countless number
 Of white-woolled sheep, as thou seest the white-looking   stray clouds,
 Flock-wise, spread o’er the heavenly vault, when it   bloweth in spring-time. 
Twice twelve swift-footed coursers, mettlesome, fast -   fettered storm-winds,
 Stamping stood in the line of stalls, all champing their   fodder,
 Knotted with red their manes, and their hoofs all   whitened with steel shoes. 
The banquet-hall, a house by itself, was timbered of   hard fir. 
Not five hundred men (at ten times twelve to the   hundred)
 Filled up the roomy hall, when assembled for drinking   at Yule-tide. 
Thorough the hall, as long as it was, 'went a table of   holm-oak,
 Polished and white, as of steel; the columns twain of the   high-seat
 Stood at the end thereof, two gods carved out of an elm -   tree;
 Odin with lordly look, and Frey with the sun on his   frontlet. 
Lately between the two, on a bear-skin (the skin, it was   coal-black,
 Scarlet-red was the throat, but the paws were shodden   with silver),
 Thorsten sat with his friends, Hospitality sitting with   Gladness. 
Oft, when the moon among the night clouds flew, related   the old man
 Wenders from far distant lands he had seen, and cruises   of Vikings
 Far on the Baltic and Sea of the West, and the North   Sea. 
Hushed sat the listening bench, and their glances hung   on the graybeard’s
 Lips, as a bee on the rose; but the Skald was thinking   of Bragé,
 Where, with silver beard, and runes on his tongue, he is   seated
 Under the leafy beach, and tells a tradition by Mimer’s
 Ever-murmuring wave, himself a living tradition. 
Mid-way the floor (with thatch was it strewn), burned   forever the fire-flame
 Glad on its Slone-built hearth; and through the wide -   mouthed smoke-flue
 Looked the stars, those heavenly friends, down into the   great hall. 
But round the walls, upon nails of steel, were hanging in   order
 Breastplate and helm with each other, and here and   there in among them
 Downward lightened a sword, as in winter evening a   star shoots. 
More than helmets and swords, the shields in the   banquet-hall glistened,
 White as the orb of the sun, or white as the moon’s disk   of silver. 
Ever and anon went a maid round the board and filled   up the drink-horns;
 Ever she cast down her eyes and blushed; in the shield   her reflection
 Blushed too, even as she; — this gladdened the hard -   drinking champions. 
