Pan Tadeusz

[Book XI (excerpt)]

Year 1812

O year of years! And to have seen thee there! 
The people call thee still the harvest year,
 The soldiers year of war; the old men long
 To tell of thee, and poets dream in song. 
By heavenly signs thou wast long heralded,
 And rumour vague among the people spread;
 The hearts of Lithuanians in that Lent
 Were filled with strange presentiment,
 As though the ending of the world were nigh,
 With joy and yearning and expectancy. 

When first the cows were driven from the shed,
 Men noticed that, thought hungry and ill-fed,
 They did not run out to the winter corn,
 That with its greenness did the fields adorn,
 But lay with drooping heads upon the mead,
 And lowed or listless chewed the winter feed. 

Nor did the peasants, as they drove the plough,
 Rejoice to see the winter ending now,
 And working lazily they sang no rhyme,
 As though forgetting seed and harvest time. 
The harrower checked his horse at every pace,
 And anxious looked towards the western space,
 As if he hoped some portent to discern,
 And anxiously they watched the birds return. 
The stork had flown already to his pine,
 Spreading white wings – of spring the early sign. 
And then the noisy regiments of swallow,
 That gathered o’er the waters, soon did follow,
 Collecting for their houses frozen mud. 
At eve the woodcocks whispered in the wood,
 And flocks of wild geese o’er the forest whirred,
 And settling noisily to rest were heard. 
The cranes were clamouring in the dark o’erhead,
 Whereat the watchman asked in tones of dread,
 Whence came such chaos to the winged domain,
 What storm had brought the birds so soon again. 

And now like flocks of starling, finch and plover
 New flocks of pennons and bright plumes came over,
 Shone on the hills and to the plains dropped down. 
Horsemen! strange uniforms and arms unknown,
 Regiment on regiment by every road,
 Like melted snow the iron-shod column flowed,
 Caps darkened from the woods and bayonets gleamed,
 And infantry like ants unnumbered streamed. 

And all were going north; they seemed to come
 Behind the birds from some far sunny home,
 As if by instinct driven in their flight. 
Men, horses, arms and eagles day and night
 Flowed on; the sky glowed with a fiery glare,
 Earth shook, and there was thunder everywhere. 

War! War! On every side the roar of war
 Through all the land of Lithuania! 
The clamour reached the innermost recess:
 The peasant in the darkest wilderness,
 Whose ancestors and kin had lived and died
 And never seen beyond the forest side,
 Who knew no other voices in the skies
 Than of the winds, on earth than wild beasts’ cries,
 To whom no guests save forest dwellers came,
 Now saw the sky with fearful fire aflame –
 And then a crash – a cannon ball had strayed
 And tearing up the trees a path had made. 
The bearded bison in his mossy lair
 Trembled, and bristled up his shaggy hair. 
Half standing and upon his hind legs raised,
 He shook his hoary beard, and saw amazed
 The glittering sparks that in the brushwood fell –
 It was a twirling, whirling, hissing shell,
 That went off with a roar; the first time then
 He was afraid, and sought a deeper den. 

A battle! Where? The young men asked, which way? 
And seized their arms, while women turned to pray;
 And everyone was sure of victory,
 With tears of joy shouting continually:
 ‘Napoleon shall be victorious,
 God with Napoleon, and he with us!’ 
O spring of springs! Who could forget that spring,
 That spring of war, that spring of harvesting. 
Who could forget how thou dist blossom then
 With corn and grass and glittering of men,
 Abounding in events and with hope teeming! 
I see thee still, fair phantom of my dreaming! 
In slavery born and bound in swaddling chain,
 I never saw a spring like that again. 
