In the Moss

Just now, as Night upon the sun-soaked land
Its gentle messengers of twilight sent,
I lay alone amid the forest moss.
The darkened branches nodded lovingly,
Along my cheek the greenery whispered low,
Invisibly the heath-rose spread its scent.

And through the lime trees’ space I saw a light
Borne by the tree as ’t were a mighty glowworm.
It flickered palely in the latticed twigs,
It glimmered like a dream mirage at dusk,
And yet I knew, it was the light of home,
Suspended on the wall of my own room.

All round so still, that in the leaves I sensed
The caterpillar chew, and like green dust
Felt gently whirling flakes of leafage fall.
I lay and thought, alas, of many things,
I even heard the beating of my heart,
It almost seemed I had already died.

And thought entwined with thought came floating up,
My childhood games, the course of youthful days,
Faces seen, long foreign to me now;
Forgotten music hummed about my ears,
And finally the present stepped in view,
The wave stood still, as at the water's edge.

Then, like a spring that seeps into the deep
And bubbles forth again at further reach,
I stood at once within the future's bounds;
I saw myself there, now all bent and shrunk,
With weakened eyes, before an heirloom chest
Arrange with care Love's tokens filmed with dust.

I saw my cautious hand undo the wraps
Round faded portraits of my precious dead,
Arrayed in garments now long out of date,
Round tresses, rotted, nay, dissolved to dust,
I saw along the furrow of my cheek
A scanty teardrop trickle slowly down.

And at the cemetery stone again,
Upon which stood the names known by my love,
I lay there praying, on my broken knees,
And — hear, the quail, it called! a cool breeze blew —
And then at last I saw myself, like mist,
Drift quietly into the pores of earth.

I started up and gave myself a shake,
Like one who’s just recovered from a trance,
And staggered then along the darkened hedge,
Still doubting if the star upon the height
In truth shone from the lamp beside my bed
Or was th’ eternal light above the tomb.
