Pan Tadeusz

[Book III (excerpt, ‘Discussion on Art’)]

‘Forgive me,’ said the Count, ‘if I intrude;
 I come for pardon and with gratitude:
 For pardon for your privacy abusing,
 With thanks for being witness of your musing. 
My boldness has inflicted great distress,
 And I must own my great indebtedness. 
I have disturbed a moment’s meditation;
 But I have gained a lifetime’s inspiration. 
Oh, happy moments! You may reprobate
 The man; the artist shall for pardon wait. 
Much have I dared nor shall from daring cease! 
Be judge!’ He knelt and showed his masterpiece. 

Telimena judged the sketch in courteous part
 But not as one unconversant with art. 
She spared the praise not yet forbore to cheer:
 ‘Well done!’ she cried, ‘a pretty talent here,
 But you must foster it and specially try
 To seek out lovely scenes. O happy sky
 Of Italy! O Caesar’s rosary,
 Ye classic waterfalls of Tivoli,
 Ye craggy paths of Posilipo’s grot! 
O land of painters! Pity our sad lot! 
The Muses’ child, in Soplicowo raised,
 Would surely die, I’ll have your picture glazed,
 Or put it in the great portfolio
 Of pictures I collect in my bureau.’ 

And so they started talking of blue sky,
 Of murmuring seas, sweet airs and mountains high,
 As travellers do, mingling from time to time
 Contempt and laughter for their native clime. 
Yet all around in solemn splendour stood
 The glory of the Lithuanian wood! 
The wild hop wreathed upon the currant bush;
 The service tree with shepherdess’s blush;
 The hazel like a maenad clad with shapes
 Of thyrsuses and nut-brown pearls like grapes;
 The forest children, shorter than the rest,
 The hawthorn with the elder on his breast,
 And blackberry to the lips of raspberry pressed. 
The trees and bushes joined their leafy hands
 Like men and girls preparing for a dance
 Around a married couple. Midst the host
 Of forest tress stood forth the pair that most
 Excel in slenderness and lovely hue,
 The darling silver birch and her spouse true,
 The hornbeam; while afar in silence sate
 The matron poplar and the beech sedate,
 Watching their children; and with mossy beard
 An oak on his humped back five centuries reared
 Above the fossils of his ancestors,
 As on the broken shafts of sepulchres. 

Tadeusz heard this lengthy conversation,
 In which he could not share, with much vexation. 
But when they praised the trees of foreign climes,
 The cypresses and oranges and limes,
 The aloes, olives, figs and cactuses,
 The sandalwoods and the mahoganies,
 The ivy even and the walnut trees,
 Lauding the shapes and flowers and barks of these,
 he sniffed and frowned and frowned and sniffed again,
 His rage no longer able to contain. 

Though simple, he by natural charm was moved
 And, gazing at the ancestral trees he loved,
 Began as one inspired: ‘I too have seen
 Those vaunted trees in Wilno when I’ve been
 In the botanic garden, and I know
 The kinds that in the south and east do grow
 And in that land of Italy so fair. 
But which of them with our trees can compare? 
The aloe like a lightning-rod so tall? 
The dwarfish lemon with its golden ball
 And lacquered leaves, in shape so short and stumpy
 Like a small woman, ugly, rich and dumpy? 
Or that much vaunted cypress, tall and thin,
 To boredom rather than to grief akin? 
They say that on a grave it looks forlorn –
 More like a German flunkey dressed to mourn,
 Afraid to lift an arm or head to bend,
 Lest somehow he may etiquette offend.’ 

‘Is not our honest birch a fairer one,
 That’s like a peasant weeping for her son,
 Or widow for her husband, as she stands,
 Hair streaming to the ground, and wrings her hands,
 Her silent form than sobs more eloquent? 
If, Count, on painting you are so intent,
 Why don’t you paint the trees that round you thrive? 
The neighbours will make fun of you, that live
 Upon the fertile Lithuanian plain
 And all but rocks and desert scenes disdain.’ 

‘Fair nature,’ said the Count, ‘is not the whole
 Of art, but only form and theme. The soul
 Of art, that gives it life, is inspiration,
 Which soars on pinions of imagination,
 But also must be polished by good taste
 And on the rules of painting firmly based. 
Nor nature nor enthusiasm suffice;
 The artist into ideal realms must rise. 
For art not all things beautiful are fit,
 Which you may learn in time from books on it. 
And as for painting you must know this too:
 A picture needs arrangement, point of view,
 Ensemble and grouping – most of all a sky,
 Italian sky! And that’s the reason why
 The land of Italy for landscape art
 Was ever dearest to the painter’s heart. 
Except for Breughel (no, not Van der Helle,
 The landscapist’s the one of whom I tell)
 And Ruysdael, where is found in all the north
 A landscape artist of the highest worth? 
The sky – ‘Here Telimena cut him short:
 ‘Orlowski’s’ taste was the Soplica sort;
 Soplicas, it’s well known, have this disease,
 No country but their fatherland can please. 
That painter lived in Petersburg, you know,
 (I have some works of his in my bureau)
 Close to the emperor’s court in splendid style,
 Yet longed for his own country all the while. 
He loved to call to mind his boyhood days,
 And Polish earth and sky and woods to praise.’ 
‘And he was right,’ Tadeusz grew more bold,
 ‘For your Italian sky, as I’ve been told,
 Is clear like frozen water and serene –
 What varied sights one sees here every day! 
How many pictures in the clouds at play! 
Each cloud is different: when autumn lours,
 Some crawl like tortoises and teem with showers,
 And let down to the earth a streaming train
 Like flowing tresses, rivulets of rain. 
The hail cloud rides balloon-like on the storm,
 A gleam of gold within its dark-blue form,
 A might roar around. E’en ordinary
 Small clouds like these, how rapidly they vary! 
First, like a flock of geese or swans the wind
 Compels them like a falcon from behind;
 They huddle close and swell and suddenly lo! 
Curved necks and rows of legs begin to grow,
 And o’er the heavenly vault with spreading manes
 Fly like a herd of horses on the plains,
 All silver-white; then suddenly confounded,
 Masts spring from necks and sails from manes are rounded,
 The herd becomes a ship, and o’er the sea
 Of heaven floats in silent majesty.’ 

The Count and Telimena looked up high;
 Tadeusz pointed one hand at the sky,
 And with the other gently squeezed her fingers. 
This quiet scene for several minutes lingers;
 The Count a paper on his hat deploys
 And takes his pencil. Then, unwelcome noise,
 The house bell rings; immediately all round
 The silent woods with shouts and din resound. 

The noble shook his head and gravely spoke:
 ‘Thus fate ends all things with a clapper stroke. 
The mind’s profoundest thoughts and fancy’s flights,
 The joys of friendship, innocent delights,
 The hear’s outpourings – at the brazen roar
 All’s broken and confused and is no more.’ 
Then glancing at the lady feelingly:
 ‘What then remains?’ She answered, ‘Memory.’ 
