The Metamorphosis of Plants

Overwhelming, beloved, you find all this mixture of thousands,
 Riot of flowers let loose over the garden’s expanse;
 Many names you take in, and always the last to be spoken
 Drives out the one heard before, barbarous both to your ear. 
All the shapes are akin and none is quite like the other;
 So to a secret law surely that chorus must point,
 To a sacred enigma. Dear friend, how I wish I were able
 All at once to pass on, happy, the word that unlocks! 
Growing consider the plant and see how by gradual phases,
 Slowly evolved, it forms, rises to blossom and fruit. 
From the seed it develops as soon as the quietly fertile
 Womb of earth sends it out, sweetly released into life,
 And to the prompting of light, the holy, for ever in motion,
 Like the burgeoning leaves’ tenderest build, hands it on. 
Single, dormant the power in the seed was; the germ of an image,
 Closed in itself, lay concealed, prototype curled in the husk,
 Leaf and root and bud, although colourless yet, half-amorphous;
 Drily the nucleus so safeguards incipient life,
 Then, aspiring, springs up, entrusting itself to mild moisture,
 Speedily raises itself out of encompassing night. 
Single, simple, however, remains the first visible structure;
 So that what first appears, even in plants, is the child. 
Following, rising at once, with one nodule piled on another,
 Always the second renews only the shape of the first. 
Not the same, though, for ever; for manifold — you can observe it —
 Mutably fashioned each leaf after the last one unfolds,
 More extended, spikier, split into lances or segments
 Which, intergrown before, lay in the organ below. 
Only now it attains the complete intended perfection
 Which, in many a kind, moves you to wonder, admire. 
Many-jagged and ribbed, on a lusciously, fully fleshed surface,
 Growth so lavishly fed seems without limit and free. 
Forcefully here, however, will Nature step in to contain it,
 Curbing rankness here, gently perfecting the shapes. 
Now more slowly the sap she conducts, and constricts the vessels,
 And at once the form yields, with diminished effects. 
Calmly the outward thrust of the spreading leaf-rims recedes now,
 While, more firmly defined, swells the thin rib of the stalks. 
Leafless, though, and swift the more delicate stem rises up now,
 And, a miracle wrought, catches the onlooker’s eye. 
In a circular cluster, all counted and yet without number,
 Smaller leaves take their place, next to a similar leaf. 
Pushed close up to the hub now, the harbouring calyx develops
 Which to the highest of forms rises in colourful crowns. 
Thus in fulness of being does Nature now glory, resplendent,
 Limb to limb having joined, all her gradations displayed. 
Time after time you wonder as soon as the stalk-crowning blossom
 Sways on its slender support, gamut of mutable leaves. 
Yet the splendour becomes an announcement of further creation. 
Yes, to the hand that’s divine colourful leaves will respond. 
And it quickly furls, contracts; the most delicate structures
 Twofold venture forth, destined to meet and unite. 
Wedded now they stand, those delighted couples, together. 
Round the high altar they form multiple, ordered arrays. 
Hymen, hovering, nears, and pungent perfumes, exquisite,
 Fill with fragrance and life all the environing air. 
One by one now, though numberless, germs are impelled into swelling,
 Sweetly wrapped in the womb, likewise swelling, of fruit. 
Nature here closes her ring of the energies never-exhausted
 Yet a new one at once links to the circle that’s closed,
 That the chain may extend into the ages for ever,
 And the whole be infused amply with life, like the part. 
Look, beloved, once more on the teeming of so many colours,
 Which no longer may now fill with confusion your mind. 
Every plant now declares those eternal designs that have shaped it,
 Ever more clearly to you every flower-head can speak. 
Yet if here you decipher the holy runes of the goddess,
 Everywhere you can read, even though scripts are diverse:
 Let the grub drag along, the butterfly busily scurry,
 Imaging man by himself alter the pre-imposed shape. 
Oh, and consider then how in us from the germ of acquaintance
 Stage by stage there grew, dear to us, habit’s long grace,
 Friendship from deep within us burst out of its wrapping,
 And how Amor at last blessed it with blossom and fruit. 
Think how variously Nature, the quietly forming, unfolding,
 Lent to our feelings now this, now that so different mode! 
Also rejoice in this day. Because love, our holiest blessing
 Looks for the consummate fruit, marriage of minds, in the end,
 One perception of things, that together, concerted in seeing,
 Both to the higher world, truly conjoined, find their way. 
