Song

1

The golden apple, the golden apple, the hallowed fruit,
 Guard it well, guard it warily,
 Singing airily,
 Standing about the charméd root. 
Round about all is mute,
 As the snow-field on the mountain-peaks,
 As the sand-field at the mountain-foot. 
Crocodiles in briny creeks
 Sleep and stir not: all is mute. 
If ye sing not, if ye make false measure,
 We shall lose eternal pleasure,
 Worth eternal want of rest. 
Laugh not loudly: watch the treasure
 Of the wisdom of the West. 
In a corner wisdom whispers. Five and three
 (Let it not be preached abroad) make an awful mystery. 
For the blossom unto threefold music bloweth;
 Evermore it is born anew;
 And the sap to threefold music floweth,
 From the root
 Drawn in the dark,
 Up to the fruit,
 Creeping under the fragrant bark,
 Liquid gold, honeysweet, thro’ and thro’. 
Keen-eyed Sisters, singing airily,
 Looking warily
 Every way,
 Guard the apple night and day,
 Lest one from the East come and take it away. 

2

Father Hesper, Father Hesper, watch, watch, ever and aye,
 Looking under silver hair with a silver eye. 
Father, twinkle not thy steadfast sight;
 Kingdoms lapse, and climates change, and races die;
 Honor comes with mystery;
 Hoarded wisdom brings delight. 
Number, tell them over and number
 How many the mystic fruit-tree holds
 Lest the red-combed dragon slumber
 Rolled together in purple folds. 
Look to him, father, lest he wink, and the golden apple be stol’n away,
 For his ancient heart is drunk with overwatchings night and day,
 Round about the hallowed fruit-tree curled —
 Sing away, sing loud evermore in the wind, without stop,
 Lest his scaléd eyelid drop,
 For he is older than the world. 
If he waken, we waken,
 Rapidly levelling eager eyes. 
If he sleep, we sleep,
 Dropping the eyelid over the eyes. 
If the golden apple be taken,
 The world will be overwise. 
Five links a golden chain, are we,
 Hesper, the dragon, and sisters three,
 Bound about the golden tree. 

3

Father Hesper, Father Hesper, watch, watch, night and day,
 Lest the old wound of the world be healéd,
 The glory unsealéd,
 The golden apple stolen away,
 And the ancient secret revealéd. 
Look from west to east along:
 Father, old Himala weakens, Caucasus is bold and strong. 
Wandering waters unto wandering waters call;
 Let them clash together, foam and fall. 
Out of watchings, out of wiles,
 Comes the bliss of secret smiles. 
All things are not told to all. 
Half-round the mantling night is drawn,
 Purple fringéd with even and dawn. 
Hesper hateth Phosphor, evening hateth morn. 

4

Every flower and every fruit the redolent breath
 Of this warm sea-wind ripeneth,
 Arching the billow in his sleep;
 But the land-wind wandereth,
 Broken by the highland-steep,
 Two streams upon the violet deep;
 For the western sun and the western star,
 And the low west-wind, breathing afar,
 The end of day and beginning of night
 Make the apple holy and bright;
 Holy and bright, round and full, bright and blest,
 Mellowed in a land of rest;
 Watch it warily day and night;
 All good things are in the west. 
Till mid noon the cool east light
 Is shut out by the round of the tall hillbrow. 
But when the full-faced sunset yellowly
 Stays on the flowering arch of the bough,
 The lucious fruitage clustereth mellowly,
 Golden-kernelled, golden-cored,
 Sunset-ripened above on the tree. 
The world is wasted with fire and sword,
 But the apple of gold hangs over the sea
 Five links, a golden chain are we,
 Hesper, the dragon, and sisters three,
 Daughters three,
 Bound about
 All round about
 The gnarléd bole of the charméd tree. 
The golden apple, the golden apple, the hallowed fruit,
 Guard it well, guard it warily,
 Watch it warily,
 Singing airily,
 Standing about the charméd root. 
