The Expiation

I.

It was snowing. Every falling flake spelled defeat.
The eagle was forced to bow its head the first time.
Dismal days! The emperor led the slow retreat,
Leaving smoke - and flame-gutted Moscow behind.
It was snowing. Winter collapsed the terrain.
A plain of white followed by another white plain.
Was that an officer? A flag? You couldn’t say.
The grande armée the day before, a herd today.
You couldn’t make out flanks or the centre’s divides.
It was snowing. Wounded men found shelter in the sides
Of dead horses. You saw buglers, standing upright
In their saddles at their posts, and staring blankly — mute and white
And frozen, as some weary regiment would pass —
Their stony lips welded to the instrument’s brass.
Bullets, grape-shot, shrapnel, and the white flakes of snow
Fell together. The grenadiers held to a slow
And trembling pace. Ice bit into every moustache.
It was snowing. It was always snowing! Winds would lash
Exposed flesh and whistle. Men would march with naked feet
Over ice, in unknown regions, without any bread to eat.
They weren’t living hearts anymore, or men of war,
But a dream wandering into the fog, a mystery,
A shadowy procession on the sky’s darkened floor.
Solitude, enormous and frightening to see,
Appeared everywhere, like an avenging ghost.
The sky was weaving a shroud with its snows
Over the army, thick and silent as a sigh.
Each soldier was alone feeling he was going to die.
“Will we ever leave this country God himself would curse?”
Two enemies: the Czar, the North. The North is worse.
They scavenged the canons to burn the frames’ wood.
Whoever slept died. They no longer withstood
Assaults. They fled. Drifts covered troops everywhere.
And you could see, beneath the folds of snow and through the haze,
Entire regiments who had gone to sleep there.
Downfalls like Hannibal’s! Attila-like next days!
Caissons, stretchers, carriage wheels; deserters, wounded men
Crushed themselves at bridges to cross a swollen stream.
Ten thousand went to sleep; one hundred woke again.
Ney, whom an army had been following, could be seen
Escaping, selling off his watch to three Cossacks.
And every night: “Who goes there? ... Alert!” Assaults. Attacks.
These phantoms grabbed their guns, and saw whirlwinds of men
Rushing down on them, in the shadows, at their backs,
With screams like those of vultures ripping carrion.

An entire army perished that way in the night.
The emperor was there, watching, standing upright.
He stood like a tree being pounded by an axe.
Sinister Misfortune levelled its attacks
On this giant whose grandeur had been spared until then.
And he, the oak at which the hatchet aimed its blow,
Quivering under spectres of revenge and punishment,
Was watching his branches fall into the snow.
Enlisted men and officers alike. They all went.
Surrounding the emperor with their loyalty,
And watching his shadow come and go on the tent,
Those who remained, trusting in his destiny,
Accused Fate of desertion and lèse-majesté. 
His soul sensed horror creeping in and courage leave.
Stunned at the event, not knowing what to believe,
The emperor turned his eyes toward God; the once great
Man trembled; for Napoleon knew he must expiate
Some sin of his. Enraged and anxious, he swore
In front of his legions scattered in the snow.
“Is this my punishment,” he shouted, “God of war?”
And someone speaking in the shadows answered, “No.”
