The Mountain Wreath

[excerpt]

Voivode Batric

Turkish brothers — may I be forgiven! —
 we have no cause to beat around the bush. 
Our land is small and it’s pressed on all sides. 
Not one of us can live here peacefully,
 what with powers that are jawing for it;
 for both of us there is simply no room! 
Accept the faith of your own forefathers! 
Guard the honour of our dear fatherland! 
The wolf needs not the cunning of the fox! 
Nor has the hawk the need for eyeglasses. 
Start tearing down your minarets and mosques. 
Lay the Serbian Christmas-log on the fire,
 paint the Easter eggs various colours,
 observe with care the lent and Christmas fasts. 
As for the rest, do what your heart desires! 
If you don’t want to listen to Batric,
 I do swear by the faith of Obilic,
 and by these arms in which I put my trust,
 that both our faiths will be swimming in blood. 
Better will be the one that does not sink. 
Bairam cannot be observed with Christmas! 
Is that not so, Montenegrin brothers? 

Abbot Stefan

I have now reached eighty years of my life. 
But ever since the loss of my eyesight,
 I have lived more in the spirit’s kingdom,
 though my body still has hold of the soul,
 keeps and hides it within its boundaries,
 as underground cavern protects a flame. 
I have traveled through much of the wide world. 
Of God worship, the most sacred places
 which the earth has raised up toward heaven,
 I have beheld, one after another,
 and I’ve inhaled the altars’ holy smoke. 
I have climbed up the holy Mount Olive,
 from which the most horrible prediction
 of its ill fate Jerusalem once heard. 
I have also visited all three caves:
 where the sun of Christianity rose,
 where the heavens cast light on the manger,
 and where the kings came with their offerings
 to bow before the one heavenly child. 
I have seen, too, Gethsemane’s Garden,
 defamed by sin, passion, and betrayal. 
The evil wind put out the holy lamp! 
We see ugly thorns that have multiplied
 and are scattered across the fertile fields,
 and Omar’s temple has reared into the sky
 on Solomon’s sacred foundations;
 St. Sophia is but a stable now. 
Unusual are the traits of earthly things. 
They are full of crazy transformations. 
All of nature keeps nourishing itself
 on the purest milk of the clear sunlight. 
But the milk, too, changes into hot flame;
 today it sears what yesterday it fed. 
Not all rivers on this earth do possess
 the kind of bed they should have for their flow. 
Do we not see these terrifying things
 devastating the earth mercilessly? 
Our time on earth and human destiny,
 two faces of highest absurdity,
 the most profound science without order,
 the children or the fathers of man’s dreams —
 do we only imagine this order,
 whose deep secret we cannot unravel? 
Is it true that things are as they appear,
 or do our eyes only deceive us so? 
The world demands some kind of firm action,
 duty gives birth to new obligations,
 and defense is closely tied up with life! 
Nature provides everything with weapons
 against a force that is oft unbridled,
 against trouble and dissatisfaction. 
Sharp spikes are there to protect the corn stalks,
 and thorns defend a rose from being plucked. 
Myriads of teeth has nature sharpened
 and has pointed innumerable horns. 
Various tree-barks, wings, and speed of feet,
 and the array of seeming disorder,
 always follow some definite order. 
Over all this huge conglomeration
 again a wise, mighty force reigns supreme. 
It won’t allow for evil to triumph. 
It snuffs the spark, strikes the snake in the head. 
Man does defend his wife and his children. 
People defend their church and their nation. 
Honour is a nation’s sacred relic. 
Generations must bear their own burden. 
New needs give birth to new powers in man. 
Every action strengthens human spirit. 
Heavy pressure brings thunder to action. 
The blow calls forth a spark out of the stone,
 without the blow the spark stays imprisoned. 
Suffering is the virtue of the Cross. 
Tempered in trials and suffering, the soul
 feeds the body with electric fire,
 through hope the soul is bonded with Heaven,
 as the sun’s ray binds droplet with the sun. 
What is man? (And it’s his fate to be man!) 
A small creature deceived oft by the earth,
 yet he sees that the earth is not for him. 
Is not the real more puzzling than the dream? 
If man attains an honest name on earth,
 his being born then wasn’t at all in vain. 
But without his honest name — what is he? 
Generation which was made to be sung,
 muses will vie for many centuries
 to weave for you garlands worthy of you. 
Your example will teach gusle singers
 how one should speak of immortality! 
A fierce struggle lies ahead for you all:
 Part of your tribe has renounced its own roots
 and is therefore serving the dark Mammon! 
The curse of shame has now fallen on it. 
What is Bosnia and half of Albania? 
They’re your brothers of the same parentage. 
United all, there’s enough work for all! 
Your destiny it is to bear the Cross
 of the fierce fight against brothers and foes! 
The wreath’s heavy, but the fruit is so sweet! 
Without death there is no resurrection. 
Under a shroud of glory I see you
 and our nation’s honour resurrected. 
I also see the altar turned eastward
 and a fragrant incense burning on it. 
Die in glory, if die indeed you must! 
Wounded honour inspires courageous hearts;
 those hearts cannot tolerate such illness. 
The altar by pagans desecrated
 will once again receive the grace of God. 
