In the lovely blue ...

In the lovely blue blooms the church tower with its metal roof — around which the swallow cries hang, around which there is the most touching blue. The sun goes up high above it and colors the tin; yet in the winds above, the weathercock silently crows. If one standing under the churchbell then goes down, those steps, life is I still, because, with the form so sharply set off, it comes to the fore I that man is a fit subject for a picture. The windows out of which the I bells tone are like gates in their beauty. You see, because gates still I take after nature, they bear a similarity to the trees of the wood. But I purity is beauty too. Within, out of the diverse, a solemn spirit I arises. But so very simple the images, so very holy are they, that I often one really fears to describe them. But the Heavenly Ones, I who are always kind, have, all at once, like kingdoms, these things: I virtue and joy. Man may imitate this. May, when life is nothing but I trouble, a man look up and say, “That is how I also want to be”? Yes. I So long as kindness, the pure, still stays in the heart, man measures I himself not unhappily with the Godhead. Is God unknown? Is he I revealed like the sky? — This I believe, rather. It’s the measure of I man. Full of merit, but poetically, man dwells on this earth. But I even the shadow of night with its stars is no purer, if I may speak I so, than man, who is called an image of the Godhead.

Is there a measure on earth? There is none. You see, the I Creator’s worlds never hinder the course of his thunder. Also a I flower is beautiful, because it blooms under the sun. Often in life I the eye finds things that would be much more beautiful still to I name than flowers. Oh! I know this well! For to bleed in form and I heart, and to be absolutely no longer whole — does that please God! I But the soul, as I believe, must remain pure, otherwise the eagle I with its praising songs, and the voice of so many birds, passes with I its wings on to the Almighty. It is the essence, it’s the form. You beautiful brook, you seem touching, while you roll by so clear, like I the eye of the Godhead through the Milky Way. I certainly know you, but tears well forth from the eye. I see a serene life in the forms of creation blooming about me, because I compare them not unfairly with the lonesome doves of the churchyard. But the laughing of men seems to grieve me — you see, I have a heart. Would 1 like to be a comet? I think so. For they have the swiftness of birds; they bloom in fire, and are like children in purity. The nature of man cannot so outstrip itself as to wish to be greater. The serenity of virtue deserves to be praised, too, by the solemn spirit that wafts through the three columns of the garden. A beautiftil maid has to garland her head with myrtle-blooms, because she is simple in her nature and her feeling. But myrtles are in Greece.

If one looks into the mirror, a man, and sees therein his image, as though painted, it looks like the man. The man’s image has eyes; the moon, however, has light. King Oedipus has one eye too many perhaps. The sufferings of this man — they seem indescribable, unspeakable, inexpressible. When the play shows such a thing, you get the idea. But how is it with me if I think of you now? As with streams, the end of something is pulling me somewhere — which stretches itself out like Asia. Of course, this suffering — Oedipus has this. Of course — it’s about that. Did Hercules suffer too? To be sure. The Dioscuri, did they not also endure suffering in their friendship? You see, to struggle with God, like Hercules — that is suffering. And to share immortality in the envy of this life, — that is suffering too. But that is also suffering, when a man is bedecked with freckles, to be covered entirely with quite a few spots! The beautiful sun does that: you see, it draws everything open. It leads youths on their way, charming them with its rays — as with roses.

The sufferings Oedipus endured seem like when a poor man wails that something’s wrong. Son of Laius, poor stranger in Greece! Life is death, and death is also a life.
